Assessing Process-Centered Software
Engineering Environments
VINCENZO AMBRIOLA
Università di Pisa
REIDAR CONRADI
NTNU-Trondheim
and
ALFONSO FUGGETTA
Politecnico di Milano and CEFRIEL


Process-centered software engineering environments (PSEEs) are the most recent generation
of environments supporting software development activities. They exploit an explicit represen-
tation of the process (called the process model) that specifies how to carry out software
development activities, the roles and tasks of software developers, and how to use and control
software development tools. A process model is therefore a vehicle to better understand and
communicate the process. If it is expressed in a formal notation, it can be used to support a
variety of activities such as process analysis, process simulation, and process enactment.
PSEEs provide automatic support for these activities. They exploit languages based on different
paradigms, such as Petri nets and rule-based systems. They include facilities to edit and analyze
process models. By enacting the process model, a PSEE provides a variety of services, such as
assistance for software developers, automation of routine tasks, invocation and control of software
development tools, and enforcement of mandatory rules and practices. Several PSEEs have been
developed, both as research projects and as commercial products. The initial deployment and
exploitation of this technology have made it possible to produce a significant amount of experi-
ences, comments, evaluations, and feedback. We still lack, however, consistent and comprehensive
assessment methods that can be used to collect and organize this information. This article aims at
contributing to the definition of such methods, by providing a systematic comparison grid and by
accomplishing an initial evaluation of the state of the art in the field. This evaluation takes into
account the systems that have been developed by the authors in the past five years, as well as the
main characteristics of other well-known environments.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.2.6 [Software Engineering]: Programming Environ-
ments; K.6.3 [Management of Computing and Information Systems]: Software Manage-
ment—software development; software maintenance



Authors’ addresses: V. Ambriola, Dipartimento di Informatica, Università di Pisa, Corso
Italia, 40, 56125 Pisa, Italy; email: ambriola@di.unipi.it; R. Conradi, Department of Computer
Systems, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), N-7034 Trondheim,
Norway; email: conradi@idt.ntnu.no; A. Fuggetta, Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione,
Politecnico di Milano, P.za Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133 Milano, Italy; email: fuggetta@
elet.polimi.it.
Permission to make digital / hard copy of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or
commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication, and its date appear,
and notice is given that copying is by permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and / or a fee.
© 1997 ACM 1049-331X/97/0700 –0283 $03.50

                ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997, Pages 283–328.
284      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

General Terms: Human Factors, Languages, Management
Additional Key Words and Phrases: CASE, enabling technology, process-centered software
engineering environments, process modeling languages, software process




1. INTRODUCTION
Process-centered software engineering environments (PSEEs) are becoming
a reality. An increasing number of systems are showing up and are being
applied to real software production processes. Existing products and proto-
types are based on a variety of technologies and approaches, such as
object-oriented languages and databases, state-oriented notations, rule-
based languages, and logic languages (e.g., see Finkelstein et al. [1994]).
  We believe that an important milestone has been reached in the develop-
ment of this technology. There is some initial attempt to use it in industrial
settings, and some feedback is being provided. It is therefore worthwhile to
evaluate past experiences, to collect and organize feedback, and to provide
a tentative roadmap for our research and experimentation activities. More-
over, it is essential to develop guidelines and methods to support this
evaluation activity, in order to facilitate the collection and organization of
information and their dissemination to practitioners and researchers.
  This article aims at providing an initial assessment of the field. More
specifically, it has two goals:

(1) To provide a roadmap for the evaluation and comparison of existing
    PSEEs: The method we propose is based on an assessment grid that
    identifies the main constituents of the PSEE technology and their
    critical issues.
(2) To offer an initial assessment of the state of the art in the field: This
    assessment exploits the grid to organize evaluations and comments on
    existing PSEEs consistently.

We will base this assessment on previous work (see, e.g., Fuggetta and
Ghezzi [1994] and Lonchamp [1993]), on the evaluation of the PSEEs we
developed in our own research activity, and on other relevant approaches
developed in the research and industrial community. The three systems
that will constitute the baseline for the evaluation are OIKOS, EPOS, and
SPADE-1.
   OIKOS [Montangero and Ambriola 1994] was started in 1989 in the
framework of a research project on software engineering launched by the
Italian National Research Council. OIKOS is the ancient Greek word for
home, and it has been used in modern science as the root for words related
to the environment, such as ecology. OIKOS is thus meant to be the
“environment” for software development. The target of the OIKOS project
is to ease the construction of PSEEs. OIKOS has been developed in Prolog
and runs on a network of Sun workstations.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     285

  EPOS [Conradi et al. 1994b] has been developed at NTNU in Trondheim
since 1989, first as part of a national project and later as a Ph.D. project.
The emphasis is on flexible and evolving process assistance for software
development and maintenance to multiple software developers. EPOS
process models are expressed in SPELL, an object-oriented, concurrent,
and reflexive modeling language. Process models expressed in SPELL are
stored in EPOS-DB, a versioned software engineering database. The under-
lying platform is a network of Sun workstations, and Prolog is the main
implementation language.
  The SPADE project was started in 1991 to develop an environment for
software process analysis, design, and enactment [Bandinelli et al. 1994c].
The main concept of the project is the adoption of extended Petri nets,
augmented with specific object-oriented constructs to support product
modeling. SPADE-1, the first implementation of the SPADE concept, is
based on standard technologies that include a commercial object-oriented
database (O2) and tool integration facilities (DEC FUSE, Sun Tooltalk, and
Microsoft OLE2). The last released version of SPADE-1 (version 3.0) was
completed in the summer of 1995.
  Clearly, we do not have the ambition to address in a single article and in
a comprehensive and detailed way all of the issues and topics that are
relevant to the field. Nonetheless, we believe that it is worthwhile to collect
in a systematic way the available information, by exploiting some struc-
tured evaluation method. In this way, we provide some aids and a baseline
for further assessment and dissemination activities and for the definition
and evaluation of new research directions.
  This article is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the assessment
grid. Section 3 discusses the modeling aspects of PSEEs, while Section 4
evaluates the architectural issues and implications. Section 5 presents
some preliminary comments and evaluation on the application of PSEEs to
real industrial cases. Section 6 presents related work. Section 7 tries to
derive some “metalessons” concerning the use of the grid to assess the
existing technology. Finally, Section 8 draws some conclusions.


2. THE ASSESSMENT GRID
The assessment will be accomplished using a simple comparison grid
derived from several works on reference frameworks for software processes
[Conradi et al. 1994a; Feiler and Humphrey 1993; Lonchamp 1993] and
from the authors’ experiences.

2.1 Structure of the Grid
The grid, presented in Table I, is organized in three main parts.

  2.1.1 PML Technology. Existing PSEEs are based on a variety of
process-modeling languages (PMLs). To characterize them, we use the
following categories:
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
286      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

                                 Table I.   The Assessment Grid

      PML technology                    Scope of coverage
                                        Linguistic paradigm(s)
                                        Modeling of process entities:
                                        —activities
                                        —products
                                        —tools
                                        —roles
                                        —organizations
                                        ...
                                        Modularity/composition/reuse
                                        Mechanisms for process enactment and evolution
                                        Cooperation and concurrency control
                                        Methodological support
                                        PML tool support
      PSEE architecture                 High-level architecture
                                        Interaction with production tools and tool
                                          integration facilities
                                        Behavior of the PSEE
                                        Data integration
                                        Inconsistency management and workspace
                                          synchronization
                                        Distribution and heterogeneity
                                        Support to measurement
                                        Efficiency of the implementation
      Experiences                       Reference examples
                                        Internal experiments
                                        Industrial projects



(1) Scope of coverage: A PSEE and its PML can be adopted for a variety of
    reasons. A PML can be used to improve process comprehension and
    documentation through formal modeling, analysis, and simulation. This
    can help process improvement and process reengineering initiatives. A
    formal model can also be enacted to provide support and guidance to
    software developers. Therefore, a PSEE and its PML(s) can offer
    support to one or more phases of the process lifecycle (or metaprocess),
    that is, the set of activities that are pursued to improve a software
    process. We have identified the following main phases:1
    —Requirements specification: This phase aims at defining and/or docu-
      menting the requirements for the process, such as the expected
      performance and its general goals.
    —Assessment and problem elicitation: This phase aims at (re)evaluating
      the performance of the process and at identifying its problems,
      according to the defined goals.

1
 The sequential presentation we give of these phases does not imply that we advocate a
traditional waterfall approach. It is just a suitable way to introduce these concepts. In real
cases, different lifecycles can be introduced, according to the strategy and the goals of the
organization. This is quite similar to software product lifecycles.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
       Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                       •      287

    —(Re)design : In this phase, the process is (re)designed (or reengi-
      neered) to address the requirements and needs elicited in the previ-
      ous phase and to cope with the identified drawbacks.
    —Implementation : In this phase, the designed or modified process is
      put into operation, by modifying models, procedures, organizations,
      policies, and, possibly, the process support.
    —Monitoring and data collection : In this phase, qualitative and (when-
      ever possible) quantitative data on process performance are collected
      and analyzed to support further improvement initiatives (i.e., feed-
      back on earlier phases).
(2) Linguistic paradigm(s) used in the language (e.g., object-oriented, rule-
    based, state-oriented).
(3) Availability of constructs to model specific process entities such as
    products, activities, and roles.
(4) Linguistic constructs to support modularization, composition of specifi-
    cation, model configuration, and reuse.
(5) Mechanisms to support process model enactment (e.g., interpretation
    vs. compilation vs. mixed approaches, single thread vs. concurrent
    execution), and evolution (e.g., reflexive features).
(6) Linguistic constructs to model cooperation (among human agents) and
    concurrency control—we distinguish between synchronous (e.g., tele-
    conference) and asynchronous cooperation (e.g., email).
(7) Methodological support to the different phases of the process lifecycle.
(8) Tool support for the PML (e.g., editors, simulators, impact analyzers,
    interpreters).
  2.1.2 PSEE Architecture. The architecture of a PSEE can be character-
ized by the following aspects:
(1) High-level architecture of the PSEE (i.e., main components of the PSEE
    and their integration and interaction strategy).
(2) Basic mechanisms to integrate external production tools into the envi-
    ronment (e.g., tool wrappers). 2
(3) Behavior of the PSEE from the users’ viewpoint (i.e., paradigm of the
    PSEE user interaction environment as perceived by software develop-
    ers and by other process agents, e.g., project managers).
(4) Mechanisms for data integration and structure/role of the repository in
    the PSEE architecture.



2
  In the remainder of the article, we use the term tool integration facility to refer to the FIELD
technology, or similar approaches, and to related commercial products such as DEC FUSE, HP
BMS, and Sun Tooltalk. In particular, in FIELD a tool is composed of a collection of services
that can be invoked through a programmatic interface. A tool can broadcast messages and
request the interleaved execution of services offered by other tools. For this reason, we refer to
such tools as service-based tools .

                 ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
288      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

(5) Management of production workspaces (typically the Unix file system)
    where tools access their data; management of (possible) inconsistencies
    among workspaces and the PSEE database(s); and identification of
    operations accomplished outside the control of the PSEE (i.e., by
    directly calling a tool operating on some data in the workspace).
(6) Distribution of the environment (e.g., centralized vs. client-server vs.
    peer-to-peer) and heterogeneous versus homogeneous architectures.
(7) Support for the collection and evaluation of process and product met-
    rics.
(8) Efficiency of the implementation. Performance issues and adoption/
    integration of research prototypes to support the development of the
    PSEE (e.g., deductive DBMSs).
  2.1.3 Experiences. The observations can be derived from practical ex-
periences, classified as follows:
(1) Reference examples: Applications of the PSEE/PML to reference exam-
    ples in the literature (e.g., ISPW-6 and ISPW-7 examples).
(2) Internal experiments: Internal applications of the PSEE/PML to exam-
    ples and cases developed within the development team or derived from
    industrial projects.
(3) Industrial projects: Applications of the PSEE/PML in industrial
    projects.

3. PML TECHNOLOGY

3.1 Scope of Coverage
    OIKOS. In the initial manifesto, OIKOS was described as an environ-
ment to specify, design, and implement PSEEs [Ambriola et al. 1990].
Other goals were the comprehension and the documentation of software
processes. Three factors influenced the project from the beginning: (1) the
need for both an expressive specification language and a powerful concur-
rent enactment language, (2) the interest on the complex human interac-
tions in process-centered environments, and (3) the decision to follow an
experimental approach. OIKOS is based on two separate languages, Limbo
and Patè, covering mainly the requirement specification and implementa-
tion phases, respectively.
     EPOS. EPOS emphasizes expressing enactable and evolving process
models, offering a spectrum of process support: from “soft” assistance to
“hard” control and both manual and automated tool activation and execu-
tion. Nonenactable process requirements, specifications, and designs are
not well supported, although some aspects of the PML can be used to
describe more informal and incomplete models. Process models can be
hierarchically specialized and dynamically refined at runtime, supported
by an explicit metaprocess. There is marginal support for formal analysis
or multiple views of process models. There is no formal metrics support.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
       Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                     •     289

The process agent is assumed to have a good knowledge of the process
model and its PML, as the external view is very close to the PML
semantics.
     SPADE-1. The long-term goal of the SPADE project is to provide
methods and techniques to support the entire process lifecycle. The technol-
ogy that has been developed so far, however, is mainly oriented toward
supporting the implementation and monitoring phases.
  SLANG (the SPADE Language) can also be used to support analysis and
design, because its graphical syntax (based on traditional Petri nets) is
easy to learn and to use. However, in these phases several features of the
language that are mainly oriented toward supporting enactment are use-
less, while other high-level concepts useful for supporting these earlier
phases are missing (as discussed later).
     Other Systems. Most approaches that have been developed so far
basically address implementation and monitoring, as in APPL/A [Sutton et
al. 1995] and in the Japanese project Hakinowa [Iida et al. 1994].
  In some cases, there has been a significant attempt to enlarge the scope
of coverage. For instance, MERLIN offers (1) statecharts and ER diagrams
as high-level modeling aids and (2) a Prolog-based language to support
process implementation [Junkermann et al. 1994]. In PADM, there is a
specification language called BM (based on temporal logic), while imple-
mentation is supported by PML (Process Management Language3), which
offers such features as subtyping, persistency, reflection, and concurrent
threads of execution [Bruynooghe et al. 1994]. Different languages for
different phases of the process lifecycle are also provided by SMART [Garg
et al. 1994].
     Evaluation. Based on our experience in using OIKOS, EPOS, and
SPADE-1, a first important issue is the distinction between the different
phases of the process lifecycle. Their goals are different, and therefore their
outcomes differ significantly.
  During requirement specification (process analysis), the goals are mainly
to understand the process, to make it explicit, and to facilitate its commu-
nication, comprehension, and assessment. The resulting model will de-
scribe the expected and desired behavior of the process, the roles to be
played, and the high-level procedures to follow.
  Conversely, the implementation phase aims at producing an automated
process support that facilitates the achievements of the objectives and goals
stated in the requirement phase. The result of this phase is often a complex
“code” that entails many details such as tool integration and process step
encoding. Most of these details are almost irrelevant during analysis and
design. For an example, we can consider some experiences gained in


3
 In PADM, PML stands for Process Management Language, and it is the name of the language
used to model processes. It must not be confused with the acronym PML, used in this article
generally to indicate a Process Modeling Language.

                ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
290      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

applying SLANG to describe an industrial process [Bandinelli et al. 1995].
The high-level description of the process that was generated with the
purpose of improving the quality manual is quite different in terms of
structure and content from its enactable model used to provide process
support, even if we used the same language [Bandinelli et al. 1996b].
Language constructs are used in different ways. For instance, the activity
construct of SLANG, when used to describe the process, was exploited to
identify at different levels of granularity the logical steps of the process. In
the enactable model, activities are used to modularize the “code” used to
control tools or to “implement” specific cooperation patterns. Thus, in the
enactable model, SLANG activities do not express the logical steps of the
process. They are just used as the modularization facilities of traditional
programming languages (e.g., procedures, coroutines, and tasks). It is,
therefore, important to emphasize the basic distinction between specifica-
tion of requirements (i.e., the problem) and specification of the implementa-
tion (i.e., the solution).
   Consequently, a critical issue is to understand the characteristics of the
PMLs that are needed to support the different phases of the lifecycle. In the
earlier phases, the requirements for the PML are basically expressiveness
and support for analysis, while in the implementation phase, the emphasis
is on flexible mechanisms to build an effective and efficient process sup-
port. For this reason, we introduce a more precise and detailed character-
ization of PMLs based on the phases they support:
(1) We will use the term PML to indicate any language that can be used to
    provide some description (or “model”) of the software process.
(2) PMLs can then be classified according to the phase of the process
    lifecycle they support and the level of abstraction they provide. We
    distinguish three different types of PMLs:
      —Process specification languages (PSLs): These languages are suited to
       support the requirement specification and assessment phases.
      —Process design languages (PDLs): These languages offer features that
       are useful in the design phase.
      —Process implementation languages (PILs): These languages are
       mainly used in the implementation and monitoring phases.4
Notice that the distinction we propose does not necessarily require the
existence of separate languages. As we discuss in more detail in the next
section, there are at least two extreme strategies: (1) one large PML that
includes all of the features that are typical of PSLs, PDLs, and PILs and (2)
distinct and separate languages for the different phases of the process
lifecycle. Here we want to stress that most of the problems we encounter in
understanding and comparing existing PSEEs and PMLs stem from an
unclear identification of the role of the PML with respect to the different
phases of the process lifecycle (this will be discussed later in the article).

4
The assessment and problem elicitation phase can, in general, take advantage of process
models produced at different levels of abstraction using different types of PMLs.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     291

3.2 Basic Characteristics of a PML
In this section we provide a discussion of the three main aspects that
characterize a PML: (1) linguistic paradigm(s), (2) modeling of process
entities, and (3) features to support modularity, composition, and reuse.


  3.2.1   Linguistic Paradigm(s)
  OIKOS. Limbo, the OIKOS specification language, is based on tuple
spaces, coordinators, and angels. A tuple space is a passive container of
tuples that represent the state of a computation. A coordinator is an active
entity that operates on a tuple space by reading and writing tuples from it.
A coordinator can also send tuples to other tuple spaces. Angels are the
basic process entities, specified by their external behavior (the messages
they can send) and constrained by extended path expressions. According to
the OIKOS lifecycle, a process is first specified by angels and then refined,
replacing the angels with tuple spaces and coordinators.
  Patè is a concurrent language based on hierarchical multiple tuple spaces
and rule-driven agents. As in Limbo, a tuple space is a passive container of
tuples that can be read and written by the agents that are active on the
tuple space. An agent is defined by a set of forward rules and a path
expression. A rule is fired when it is enabled by the path expression and
when its precondition is satisfied by the tuple space (i.e., it unifies with a
subset of the tuple space). The precondition of a firing rule can remove
tuples from the tuple space. The body of a rule is a Prolog goal without side
effects. The postcondition defines the tuples to be written in the agent tuple
space and in other tuple spaces whose addresses are known to the agent.
  The rationale of this choice is the intrinsic reactive nature of the software
process and its structural complexity. The specification language has been
designed with a refinement strategy in mind; the enactment language is
well suited to modeling reactive concurrent systems.
   EPOS. SPELL is a concurrent and reflexive language that has Prolog as
a subset. It supports object-oriented modeling (ERA data model with
triggers). Process entities are described by SPELL types and instances of
them. Activity (task) networks in SPELL can express both goal-oriented
process models, using static rules and constraints for automatic network
planning, as well as activity-oriented process models, using dynamic pre-
and postconditions and scripts. The metaprocess for defining and evolving
the process model can be expressed using the reflective features of SPELL
(similar to metatypes in Smalltalk).
   The reasons for having Prolog as a base language are the classic ones:
interpretation to support evolving models, reasoning facilities (e.g., on pre-
and postconditions by the Planner tool), easy creation of mockups for
process models and databases, and access to a powerful user interface tool
(PWI). In some sense, SPELL is Prolog extended with object orientation
(types), reflection (metatypes), and tasking.
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
292         •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

  SPADE-1. SLANG is based on ER nets, a high-level extension of Petri
nets. In SLANG, tokens are associated with values, and transitions are
associated with rules. Every token is implemented and accessed as an
object in an object-oriented database. Every rule is composed of a condition,
used to extract an enabling tuple (i.e., tokens satisfying the condition) from
the database, and a set of statements to specify how to create the output
tuple. Thus, SLANG integrates object-oriented techniques for product
modeling, with Petri nets for (strict) process modeling. Moreover, every
transition is associated with a forward rule (“if there is at least one
enabling tuple, the action part can be executed using any one of the
enabling tuples as input”). The rationale of this choice can be summarized
as follows:
—The artifacts produced during software development are complex and
 strictly interrelated. The object-oriented paradigm makes it possible to
 easily describe both the structure of artifacts and their relationships.
—A software development process is composed of multiple activities that
 are executed in parallel and that need to be synchronized. The extended
 Petri net notation adopted in SLANG makes the modeling of these
 aspects quite natural and easy to understand.
  Other Systems. There have been several attempts to identify a reason-
able classification of PML paradigms. For instance, Curtis et al. [1992]
identify five different paradigms:
(1) Programming models (e.g., APPL/A and PADM/PML).
(2) Functional models (e.g., HFSP [Katayama 1989]).
(3) Petri net (and state transition) models (e.g., SPADE-1, Melmac [Gruhn
    and Jegelka 1992], and ProcessWeaver [Fernström 1993]).
(4) Plan-based models (e.g., GRAPPLE [Huff and Lesser 1989]).
(5) Quantitative models (e.g., system dynamics [Abdel-Hamid and Madnick
    1991]).
Another classification is proposed by Lonchamp [1994], where six different
classes are identified: graphical, net oriented, procedural, object oriented,
rule based, and multiparadigms. In general, the issue is still debated in the
community (see Section 3.2.4).
    3.2.2       Modeling of Process Entities
  OIKOS. Typical entities used in process modeling are process,5 office,
environment, desk, role, and service. Process modeling is performed top-
down, by refining an entity in terms of its depending entities. For instance,
a process is recursively composed of an office, some services, and some
processes. The leaves of the refinement tree are roles and services.


5
 Here, an OIKOS “process” is an entity that combines managerial and technical aspects of
software development.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     293

  Services [Ambriola et al. 1994] are in charge of managing resources such
as documents and workspaces. Documents are stored in repositories and
manipulated by tools that operate in workspaces (i.e., Unix directories).
  Entities are used in Limbo to specify the process. The refinement of a
Limbo specification produces a Patè program. Artifacts are modeled in the
database by using a simple DDL (data definition language) that allows the
definition of a hierarchy of document types.
   EPOS. Products, activities (tasks), and other process elements are
modeled as SPELL types and their instances. This can occur at different
levels of granularity.
   Tasks have predefined properties, allowing them to stand in a task
network with both a hierarchical (decomposition) and horizontal (chaining)
dimension. A task type has also static pre- and postconditions for static
reasoning, and dynamic pre- and postconditions and a script for dynamic
triggering and execution. Task types contain formal parameters and formal
decompositions, that is, the legal set of input– output operands and of
subtasks, respectively. This expresses a minimal graph grammar or tem-
plate to describe network fragments.
   A predefined product model (i.e., SPELL types to create product “fami-
lies”) is supported by special product/workspace tools outside the basic
process tools. Production tools are enveloped and modeled as task types,
with a script to activate the tool and an extra input parameter to receive
feedback. A mailbox facility with special “product” types is available to
send and receive messages.
   A task can be associated with a role and then executed by agents playing
that role. Projects are special tasks, containing change requests and logs,
product/versioning information, available resources, and communication
protocols. A project task is associated with a database transaction, and the
project and transaction hierarchies map directly onto each other. Concepts
and associated formalisms for modeling versioning, transactions, external
workspaces, and organizations are expressed outside of SPELL.
   SPADE-1. SLANG built-in features are oriented toward model activities
and products. It is also possible to integrate and control different kinds of
tools at two levels of granularity (activation/termination of a tool and
invocation of individual tool services). SLANG does not include a built-in
construct to describe roles, goals, and workspaces. A primitive SLANG
construct for roles would be useful to support earlier phases in the process
lifecycle. At this time, roles can be implemented as objects (i.e., tokens) and
associated operations (i.e., object methods and transition rules) in a
SLANG activity. Workspaces are explicitly managed by specifying in some
SLANG activity the operations needed for their creation and manipulation.
As discussed in more detail later on, the approach adopted in SLANG is to
have a simple language where process-specific concepts are modeled explic-
itly by the process modeler.

              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
294         •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

   Other Systems. Some existing PSEEs incorporate process-specific con-
cepts as predefined language constructs. For instance, PEACE offers spe-
cific constructs to represent tasks, artifacts, agents, and roles [Arbaoui and
Oquendo 1994]. In other cases, the language includes only generic con-
structs, with little, if any, process-specific semantics.
    3.2.3       Modularity, Composition, and Reuse
  OIKOS. The modular entity of Limbo is the angel. Angels are composed
to form complex systems. In Patè, the modular entities are the tuple space
and the agents.
  EPOS. Most SPELL properties can be declared private or public in an
ADT style. There is no explicit submodel or subschema construct, except for
simple decomposition and chaining definitions (type-level constraints or
templates; see the next point). Process models are defined in a (sub)project
context, corresponding to versioned (sub)transactions. Thus, it is possible
to “inherit” a template model from the parent project, which then can be
customized and evolved locally. Project-internal tasks can be decomposed in
hierarchies, representing submodels at different abstraction levels (e.g.,
composite vs. basic activities).
  SPADE-1. SLANG offers a modularization facility that makes it possi-
ble to structure a process model as a hierarchy of SLANG nets. The
modularization construct is called an activity.6 Each activity is a SLANG
net with an interface and an implementation. The implementation of an
activity can include the invocation of other activities. Each invocation
implies the creation of a new instance (active copy) of the invoked activity,
which is executed asynchronously with respect to the caller.
  Other Systems. It is not easy to classify the modularization facilities
offered by existing PMLs. Obviously, the modularization facility of each
PML is often implicitly defined by the paradigm of the language used.7 In
most cases, they are just missing, that is, the process model is conceived as
a monolithic specification. A significant example of a language that has a
rich set of constructs to support modularization is APPL/A, where the
features of Ada are fully exploited to organize and structure a complex
process specification in a set of cooperating tasks and packages.
  3.2.4 Evaluation of the Basic Characteristics of a PML. As discussed in
Section 2, real-world software production processes can be very large and
can have a variety of process entities that must be modeled and supported,
perhaps with different granularities of precision. Typical entities to be
modeled are activities, products, versioning, and configuration policies, and
user, roles, organizations, projects, tools, transaction models, workspace


6
 Here, a SLANG “activity” is just the keyword adopted to identify a net fragment.
7
 This is not a general situation. For instance, SLANG is based on Petri nets, which
intrinsically do not offer any modularization facilities.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     295

management policies, and user interface metaphors and styles of interac-
tion.
   Key issues are how to design the PMLs that support the process lifecycle
and to what extent they have to include constructs to directly support the
modeling of all or some of the above entities. The chosen strategy for PML
design will influence the size and complexity of the PMLs and the resulting
process models themselves. That is, what is the borderline between the
fixed or “core” constructs of a PML, and the soft or declarable policies built
on top of it?
   To illustrate the PML design problem, we present some examples con-
cerning the development of a PIL:

(1) Tool integration: Many PILs provide a synchronous mechanism to
    model the invocation of external tools (e.g., a compiler). This mecha-
    nism allows the process modeler to specify initial parameter prepara-
    tion, actual tool invocation, and final control operations.
       Other PSEEs offer lower-level constructs to invoke and control tools.
    For instance, OIKOS, SPADE-1, and EPOS include an asynchronous
    construct to start an external tool and a triggering construct to detect
    events occurring outside the control of the PSEE. These lower-level
    constructs are less abstract and “readable” than the synchronous con-
    structs discussed above. Thus, to achieve the same effect of other more
    abstract constructs, it is necessary to properly combine these lower-
    level constructs in a process model fragment that describes how to
    invoke and control the tool. However, these lower-level constructs are
    essential to manage service-based tools. To manage the interaction with
    these tools, it is necessary to specify reactive policies to each tool
    operation (e.g., an editor file-open request), and even the policy to
    control mutual tool interaction (e.g., automatic invocation of the editor
    when the compiler identifies an error). Thus, by adopting these lower-
    level constructs we lose on expressiveness and readability, but we gain
    on flexibility and degree of control.
(2) Support for evolution: Some PSEEs offer high-level features to support
    evolution, through predefined PML constructs. They define “the” pol-
    icy(ies) to evolve the process model. For instance, in MELMAC it is
    possible to invoke a command that allows the modification of a process
    model fragment immediately before it is enacted.
       Other PILs (e.g., EPOS and SPADE-1) offer basic, reflexive con-
    structs to support the specification of the “process of change” as part of
    the process itself. The actual evolution policy must therefore be explic-
    itly “programmed” by the process modeler. In this way, the policy can
    be freely changed or adapted according to specific process requirements.
    A reflexive and rather low-level PIL is therefore useful to “implement”
    an evolving process support. Such a PIL will be, however, unsuitable to
    express in a very readable way more high-level policies and strategies
    to accomplish process changes in a corporate organization.
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
296      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

These two examples illustrate that PSEEs often have embedded improper
features as basic PIL constructs. PILs have often been enriched with
high-level features, because the (implicit) goal was to use them as PSLs or
PDLs as well.
  The key issue is therefore how we design and evaluate the effectiveness
of a given PML (or set of PMLs). According to our experience, it is possible
to identify some design strategies for the development of PMLs.
  A PSEE can be based on any of the following approaches:

(1) There is just one PML to cover all of the different phases of the process
    lifecycle. This PML contains predefined language constructs to support
    all of the phases in the process lifecycle, that is, a single and probably
    very large language that includes all process-related concepts (e.g.,
    roles, organizations, goals, and evolution facilities). This is the ap-
    proach implicitly adopted by most existing projects, even if the empha-
    sis is in many cases on the implementation phase.
(2) There are two or more PMLs with different characteristics to address
    different phases of the lifecycle. This is the approach adopted by
    OIKOS, where Limbo plays the role of PSL/PDL and Patè is the PIL,
    and by other systems such as PADM and MERLIN. We believe this is
    the approach to be followed to reduce the complexity of PMLs and to
    better support the different phases of the process lifecycle.

More detailed requirements for each class of PMLs can be summarized as
follows:
  PSLs. These are quite similar to the languages used for business
process modeling, conceptual modeling, and requirements elicitation. A
language to support this early phase of the process lifecycle should provide,
for instance, the concepts of role, organization/group, business rules, flows
of information, and time constraints. This is consistent with our experience
(e.g., [Bandinelli et al. 1995]).
  In general, PSLs should be formally defined in order to analyze process
specifications, to prove properties or evaluate performance, and to simu-
late/prototype the process. It must be possible, however, also to use these
languages in an informal way at the beginning of the specification activity,
as experiences in traditional software development have demonstrated
(see, e.g., [Fuggetta et al. 1993]).
  PDLs. At the design level, we need languages to specify or express the
architecture of the enactable process model. In particular, we should be
able to reuse concepts from software architecture. Here, the emphasis is on
constructs to specify modules, concurrent processing elements, module
connectors, etc. [Garlan and Shaw 1993]. Actually, an enactable process
model is a complex and structured entity that is quite similar to traditional
software. APPL/A is a PIL that also offers advanced PDL facilities that
have been directly inherited from Ada (e.g., packages and tasks).
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     297

   PILs. The experiences from the implementation level are more mature.
It is therefore possible to offer a richer and more detailed discussion of the
ideal features of a PIL.
   First, it is possible to identify three general strategies for designing a
PIL:
(1) The PIL contains a rich set of process-specific concepts. This is the
    choice of several languages, such as PEACE [Rabbi and Oquendo 1994].
(2) The PIL contains one set of very basic constructs that are used by the
    process implementor to build more complex concepts. The basic as-
    sumption here is that, without enough knowledge and experience on the
    characteristics of PILs, it may be sensible to let certain entities be
    definable in a very flexible way. For instance, the PIL may not provide
    the concept of “role” as predefined and may not offer basic type/object
    constructors to model such an entity. In this class, we have SLANG and
    Patè.
(3) Different process entities are covered by separate sub-PILs, but are
    wholly independent of and orthogonal to the “core” PIL. For instance,
    organizations and products are modeled using different languages.
    Again, the rationale is not to freeze into the “core” PIL those concepts
    that can change from process to process. In this class, we have EPOS.
    This might be considered a generalization of the bilevel approach
    advocated by Kaiser et al. [1993]. Clearly, this strategy introduces the
    critical issue of how to manage the interoperation among different
    languages [Montangero 1995].
According to our experience, the features that must be offered by a PIL are
as follows:
(1) Modeling of concurrent activities: This requirement derives from the
    nature of software processes that are typically concurrent activities. In
    our PSEEs, this is accomplished using Petri nets (SLANG), concurrent
    agents (OIKOS), and cooperating transactions and their internal tasks
    (EPOS). This requirement has an important impact on the enacting
    mechanisms that have to be provided (i.e., the PIL run-time support).
(2) Modeling of products: We advocate an object-oriented paradigm, since
    in our experience this seems to be the paradigm that is more appropri-
    ate to describe products and process artifacts. However, use of object-
    oriented technology (such as OODBMSs) is still problematic (we discuss
    standardization of technologies for the PSEE database later in the
    article).
(3) Integration mechanisms: Mechanisms to control at a fine-grained level
    (e.g., messages) the tools used by PSEE users are essential to manage
    the interaction among users and between users and the PSEE in an
    effective and consistent way [Bandinelli et al. 1996b].
(4) Modularization facilities: This is needed to support independent devel-
    opment, enactment, and maintenance of different process model frag-
    ments.
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
298      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

(5) Basic mechanisms to support workspace management: Examples are
    features to describe the structure of a workspace and the policies that
    have to be followed to manage it.
(6) Basic mechanisms to describe concurrency control: The PIL should offer
    very basic mechanisms to specify the different policies for concurrency
    control. Most of the systems supporting so-called long-lived transac-
    tions offer concepts that are too high level, which de facto implement
    predefined policies. They are not general enough to model and support
    the variety of cooperation patterns being used in software processes.
(7) Reflexive features: This is a key feature that supports evolution of the
    process model and/or its enactment state, either in advance or on-the-
    fly.

As a summary of our discussion on PILs, we would like to reflect on the
way these classes of languages are designed and implemented. Based on
our experience, we claim that, for a PIL to cover the above list of require-
ments, the actual choice of paradigm (e.g., rule-based vs. state-oriented) is
not so important. Actually, most PILs are hybrid languages that integrate
different paradigms. For instance, SLANG integrates Petri nets, object-
oriented modeling of products, forward rules to specify transition actions,
and the activity construct (similar to multiple-entries, multiexits corou-
tines) to support modularization. What really counts are the following:

—Overall PIL enactment architecture: Critical issues are the integration
 with tools, the parallelism and efficiency of the PIL run-time support,
 and its degree of distribution.
—User–PSEE cooperation paradigm and views: Does the software devel-
 oper have to know the actual PIL and the internal process model
 expressed by it? The main goal of the PSEE should be to give flexible
 enactment support at the appropriate level (e.g., control, automation,
 guidance, reasoning, explaining). The user must then be presented a
 comprehensible view of his or her current work context, with proper
 connections to coworkers’ activities. Given this, the user can (more)
 intelligently execute and relate to his or her own role in the overall
 process. This does not only depend on the PIL paradigm and can even be
 completely decoupled from it (see, also, the next section) [Bandinelli et al.
 1994a].
—Easy user-level evolution of the process model: Again, the goal is to
 provide an understandable view of the model, so that it can be changed
 even by the process agents themselves, if and when needed.

3.3 Mechanisms for Process Enactment and Evolution
  OIKOS. A Patè program is executed by a distributed interpreter fully
integrated in the OIKOS architecture. Tuple spaces and agents can be
added dynamically to a running system. To start the execution of an agent,
the interpreter loads the agent rules from a repository (the file system, in
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     299

the current implementation). This mechanism allows a low-level degree of
evolution.
   The Patè interpreter is implemented in Prolog, augmented with a library
for network communication. The interpreter is a concurrent program made
of a collection of Unix processes allocated over the network. Many instances
of the Patè interpreter can be active at the same time. Each instance of the
Patè interpreter runs a hierarchy of tuple spaces.
   EPOS. Each project/transaction has its own instance of the Prolog
interpreter. Tasks are executed in a coroutine fashion within a transaction;
that is, only one modeled task can be active at one time. However, such an
active task will only run for a short time before it (re)initiates some
external user/tool via a BMS. It then passivates itself to wait for responses
from the user/tool, and another task can therefore soon be run. Tasks with
satisfied dynamic preconditions are either run automatically or presented
to users as parts of an agenda. The evaluation of preconditions is performed
automatically, but can have side effects, for example, upon reading a
mailbox. True parallelism occurs between projects/transactions and be-
tween invocations of external production tools.
   The process model is versioned and reflective. It can modify itself during
its execution, modeled by special SPELL metatypes and instances thereof,
and through incremental task network construction.
   SPADE-1. Every instance of a SLANG activity (i.e., an active copy) is
executed by an independent SLANG interpreter. Thus, during enactment,
multiple active copies are concurrently executed by many SLANG inter-
preters. Different SLANG interpreters can exchange information through
shared places, that is, Petri net places that are shared by different SLANG
activities. Consistency (i.e., atomicy of Petri net transition) is always
ensured because a SLANG transition is executed as an ACID transaction.
   Evolution is supported through reflexive features (late binding, dynamic
invocation, and visibility of programs as data). In particular, activity
definitions (i.e., their graphical representation) and active copies’ states
(i.e., the state of enacting instances of activity definitions) can be seen as
tokens and, therefore, can be manipulated by some SLANG activity as any
other token.
  Other Systems. APPL/A is a traditional compiled language. There is no
process engine (e.g., interpreter) because each APPL/A “code” is compiled
and linked to create an autonomous executable program. The same ap-
proach is adopted in Process Weaver, even if applied within the context of a
completely different language (i.e., based on Petri nets).
  Reflection appears to be the chosen feature to support evolution. In other
cases, ad hoc mechanisms are provided in the environment to support
changes to the process model while it is enacted. MELMAC offers an
intermediate solution where it is possible to stop enactment before execut-
ing a net fragment and to support its on-line customization. Finally, in
other systems, process models are supposed to evolve off-line with respect
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
300      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

to their enactment and support to the software development process (e.g.,
APPL/A).
  Evaluation. As in traditional software development, process model exe-
cution can be achieved by exploiting two basic approaches:

(1) compiled approaches (e.g., APPL/A); and
(2) interpreted approaches using an interpreter or “process engine” (as in
    most existing systems).

The alternative followed by most researchers (i.e., the adoption of the
interpreted approach) is certainly due to the assumption that the technique
can be exploited to effectively support process model evolution during
enactment.

3.4 Cooperation and Concurrency Control
  OIKOS. OIKOS does not provide any specific support to synchronous
cooperation. Asynchronous cooperation is supported by controlling the
behavior and interaction of tools used by software developers.
  As for concurrency control, roles cooperate inside the same process by
exchanging messages and by synchronizing on document access. At a lower
level, concurrency is obtained by using different Patè agents that perform
independent actions. These agents synchronize themselves by accessing the
tuple space, where they expect to find specific tuples.
  EPOS. The underlying EPOS-DB offers versioned, long, nested, and
cooperating (nonserializable) transactions. Similar cooperative transaction
models are found, for example, in Korth et al. [1985], Fernandez and
Zdonik [1989], and Skarra [1989]. An external, file-based workspace is
associated to a database (sub)transaction. Both product- and file-based
check-out/check-in operations are available via the EPOS Workspace Man-
ager and its ECM tools. Synchrony between the external workspace and the
transaction database is ensured by extra scripts for tool activation and/or
by local, programmer-controlled check-ins.
  A Workspace Unit Declaration Language (WUDL) is used to specify a
given product and its version. It can also express lock modes (read-sets and
hard or soft write-sets) and cooperation protocols. The latter include
notification modes (busy, lazy), degree of sharing (copy-on-write, copy-on-
read, common), workspace directory structures, and consistency predicates.
WUDL and SPELL are capable of expressing flexible, user-defined policies
for handling access conflicts (e.g., breaking of locks, managing version
skews and associated merging, reestablishing consistency after changes,
and controlling change propagation). The goal is to keep cooperating and
affected partners notified about product status and possible conflicts.
  A WUDL specification is interpreted by a Cooperation Manager (CHAT
tool) and by associated watchdog tasks in SPELL. The WUDL is also used
by a Transaction Manager to help the human project manager and devel-
oper to partition, schedule, and further organize the proposed work and its
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
     Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     301

transaction structure. For instance, it will accomplish impact analysis of
proposed changes. A simple product browser is also available.
   SPADE-1. Cooperation at the user interaction level can be modeled in
SLANG by properly controlling and influencing the behavior of tools used
by process agents. This is achieved by exploiting black transitions to send
messages to tools, and user interface places to trap and reify the messages
generated by tools (for more details, see Section 4 and Bandinelli et al.
[1996b]).
   Every SLANG transition is executed atomically as an ACID transaction
operating on the O2 database. This provides the basic mechanisms to
support concurrency control. A SLANG activity combining more transitions
(i.e., more transactions) can then be used to implement complex coopera-
tion patterns (e.g., nesting transactions, chained transaction, sagas
[Bandinelli et al. 1996a]).
   Other Systems. Most approaches provide built-in facilities to model
concurrency control, that is, long-transaction mechanisms (see, e.g., Mar-
vel, MERLIN, and Adele). As for supporting cooperation among process
agents, Oz integrates facilities to support synchronous cooperation between
remote users [Ben-Shaul and Kaiser 1994]. Most PSEEs, in general, make
it possible to support only asynchronous cooperation.
  Evaluation. The issue of supporting cooperation has not been specifi-
cally addressed in most systems. The only notable exception is Oz. Some
experimentation has also been conducted in the SPADE project [Bandinelli
et al. 1996b]. These approaches emphasize the role of the PSEE as the
executor of the cooperation policy and as the infrastructure to support
asynchronous cooperation. Synchronous cooperation (e.g., real-time confer-
ences) is delegated to external CSCW components controlled by the PSEE
through its tool integration facilities.
  As for concurrency control, the main issue is once again long-lived
transactions. Do we need this kind of construct? Should we include it in the
PIL ad hoc mechanisms and constructs (as in EPOS), or should we go with
simpler languages where it is possible to support different cooperation
patterns by explicitly programming them (as in SLANG)? We do not have a
definite answer yet.

3.5 Methodological Support
  OIKOS. The development of a software process is a sequence of refine-
ments that substitute an abstract entity (an angel) with a more concrete set
of entities. This process is supported by a structured graphical editor that
controls the correctness of the refinement steps and that integrates the
graphical and the textual views of the process to be modeled.
  EPOS. SPELL is a reflexive language, and an EPOS process model is
versioned according to the EPOS-DB. The operands of a SPELL task can be
any process model fragment. EPOS thus allows full specification of the
metaprocess for constructing and maintaining process models.
             ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
302      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

   During enactment, both the task network and its types can be changed
through specific tools. After enactment, the local subproject is closed, and
its new or revised types are committed to the parent project.
   SPADE-1. SPADE-1 does not provide any predefined method to support
the development and evolution of process models. The metaprocess, what-
ever it is, can be modeled as part of the process using the reflexive features
of SLANG. Some experiences with the usage of SLANG are discussed in
Bandinelli et al. [1995]. This work suggests an iterative approach to the
specification of the process that is based on the repetition of three basic
steps: knowledge acquisition (i.e., What are the basic process characteris-
tics?), formalization (i.e., representation of the process knowledge using
SLANG), and validation (i.e., assessment of the model against the original
requirements and inputs).
  Other Systems. A method for process development and evolution is the
Prism methodology [Madhavji and Schäfer 1991]. It emphasizes the rele-
vance of change and evolution, and the need for keeping track of the
rationale for such changes. PADM/PML offers a metaprocess (PMMS
[Snowdon 1992]) to construct and evolve process models.
  Evaluation. This is an extremely critical point that is directly related to
the experiences in using PMLs and PSEEs. Most of the technology that has
been developed so far does not include any methodological support. We
have languages and tools, but very few methods to guide the development
of a process model and its enactment, extension, and evaluation. The
analysis of software processes is often accomplished without any systematic
approach. There is little if any support to guide the selection of the portion
of the process that should be modeled and supported first.

3.6 PML Tool Support
  OIKOS. Besides the Patè interpreter, a graphical tool is available to
edit and browse Limbo specifications. This tool provides support and
assistance in the refinement of Limbo specifications into Patè programs.
  EPOS. The most important EPOS-PM tool is the Process Engine on top
of the SPELL Interpreter. This enacts runnable tasks and interprets the
SPELL types. It also displays the process model under execution and its
agenda to the user. The Process Engine is connected to a tool integration
facility (HP BMS) for communication with external production tools. A task
network (re)Planner will incrementally (re)construct lower-level subtasks
to expand a goal-oriented and incomplete parent task. The Planner works
in close cooperation with the Process Engine.
  A Schema Manager with a type editor/browser is used to evolve the
types. More high-level and project-related tasks must be planned by a
human project manager and interactively generated by the EPOS Project
Manager, consisting of a Task Network Editor and a Transaction Manager.
The latter will set up the WUDL descriptions (see below) and the version
descriptions to regulate reads/writes of the EPOS-DB.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     303

   A Workspace Manager is in charge of external products and of transfer of
files by our ECM check-in/check-out tools, interpreting WUDL descriptions.
The workspace is created upon start and is flushed at end, and task types
contain scripts for continuously checking in changed files to keep the
client’s internal process model and external workspace consistent. A Coop-
eration Manager (CHAT) sets up and interprets cooperation protocols
between transactions described as project tasks.
  SPADE-1. SPADE-1 includes a SLANG graphical editor, a SLANG
compiler and type checker, a tool integration facility, a process monitor to
display the state of process enactment, two prototypes of a user agenda,
and bridges to integrate DEC FUSE, Sun Tooltalk, and OLE2 tools. It also
includes the SLANG interpreter and the SPADE manager (controlling
start-up and shut-down operations).
  Other Systems. The PML tool support offered by most PSEEs is similar
to what is currently provided by OIKOS, EPOS, and SPADE-1. Some
environments also offer some more innovative features. For instance,
Articulator offers tools supporting knowledge acquisition and process sim-
ulation [Mi and Scacchi 1990].
  Evaluation. All systems have editors to build and maintain process
models and to enact them. The latter implies a concurrent/distributed
run-time environment to support real, nontoy processes. However, there is
often little support for visualization, viewing, explanation, simulation, etc.
These kinds of issues have not been addressed in detail. In particular, we
need to clarify how the different components or languages of a PSEE should
be designed and interoperated to take care of (parts of) this task. For
instance, the visualization of the process state should be performed taking
into account a high-level view of the process such as the one offered by a
specification written in some PSL. Conversely, at run time we execute a
PIL “program” that, in general, provides a much less abstract view of the
process. Therefore, we should be able to develop reverse mapping tools to
relate the state of enactment to the more abstract specification of the
process. We experienced these phenomena in all of our systems (OIKOS,
EPOS, and SPADE-1).


4. PSEE ARCHITECTURE

4.1 High-Level Architecture
   OIKOS. OIKOS architecture is based on a virtual machine, Expo 2.0,
that allows execution of Patè programs, integration of external tools, and
interaction with the users through a graphical interface (see Figure 1). In
Expo 2.0, new components can be connected to the machine. The interac-
tion with other components is performed through message passing. Unlike
other PSEEs, Expo 2.0 does not exploit a commercial tool integration
facility and is based on a custom communication protocol.
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
304      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.




                                  Fig. 1.   OIKOS architecture.


  On top of Expo 2.0, a layer of services is in charge of managing
documents and tools. This layer exploits a centralized database imple-
mented using Salad, a logical deductive DBMS [Chimenti et al. 1990].
  EPOS. The EPOS architecture is depicted in Figure 2. It is composed of
four layers:

(1) An underlying EPOS-DB built upon the C-ISAM index-sequential file
    system: EPOS-DB is a proprietary, client-server database that stores
    process models in the context of versioned, nested, long, and cooperat-
    ing transactions. It has a structurally object-oriented data model and
    its own change-oriented version (COV) model.
(2) Enactable process models cached at the client sites: These are accessed
    using the DDL/DML (Data Definition Language and Data Manipulation
    Language) of the underlying EPOS-DB. These process models are
    essentially task networks, whose customized types are interpreted by
    EPOS-PM tools. There are also some non-SPELL descriptions, particu-
    larly WUDL, to describe versioning, transactions, workspaces, and
    cooperation protocols.
(3) A SPELL Interpreter (EPOS-PM) at the client sites: This adds full object
    orientation and reflection to the basic data objects accessed and cached
    from the EPOS-DB.
(4) Process tools (EPOS-PM) that manipulate the process model to support
    its creation, modification, and enactment: See Section 3.6. These tools
    comprise
      —the Process Engine (for tasking),
      —the (re)Planner,
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                     •     305




                                Fig. 2.   EPOS architecture.


    —the Schema Manager,
    —the Project Manager (with a Task Network Manager and a Transac-
     tion Manager),
    —the Workspace Manager, and
    —the Cooperation Manager called (using WUDL).
   SPADE-1. SPADE-1 is based on a three-layer architecture (see Figure
3). The process enactment environment includes the SLANG interpreters
that are implemented as threads of Unix processes called process engines.
Each process engine is an O2 client. The user interaction environment
includes the tools used by the SPADE-1 user to accomplish software
development activities. This layer also includes a filter that is used to
trigger events in the user interaction environment and to make them
visible as tokens in some of the SLANG activities being executed. Similarly,
the filter can trigger service requests issued by a SLANG interpreter and
forward them to the proper tools in the user interaction environment.
Basically, SPADE-1 behaves like a reactive machine, which reacts to
user-generated events.8 Finally, the third layer includes the SPADE repos-
itory, which is implemented on top of the O2 OODBMS.


8
 This does not mean that the process enactment environment cannot start an operation
autonomously.

               ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
306      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.




                                 Fig. 3.   SPADE-1 architecture.


  Other Systems. Most PSEEs are based on architectures that are quite
similar to those presented above: there is a server that is in charge of
managing the environment database, while user interaction is supported
by specialized clients and traditional software development tools that are
integrated and controlled by the server and/or the clients. Significant
variations are Process Weaver and Provence. As discussed in Section 3.3, in
Process Weaver each process model fragment is compiled and linked with
the language interpreter. For each process fragment, an autonomous Unix
process is created, which is controlled by usual operating system commands
and services. Therefore, in Process Weaver there is no notion of a central-
ized process engine(s) (or monitor) as in other systems. Basically, each
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
       Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                      •     307

process model fragment is embedded in a Unix process that is executed in a
completely independent and autonomous way. Communication among dif-
ferent processes is achieved via shared files and by the possibility of
starting the execution of a new process fragment (i.e., a new Unix process).
   In Provence, a mirrored architecture is exploited [Krishnamurthy and
Barghouti 1993]. The PSEE is not central in this architecture. Users
operate their traditional tools based on the file system. A monitor detects
relevant events at the operating system level (e.g., any file system opera-
tion) and communicates them to the process engine of the PSEE. Thus, the
operations accomplished by users are transparently mirrored in the PSEE,
and hence, Barghouti [1994] claims that it is possible to “separate process
model enactment from process execution,” in order to enhance the degree of
nonintrusiveness of the PSEE.
 Evaluation. The architectures of the PIL run-time support of OIKOS,
EPOS, and SPADE-1 partially share several common characteristics:
(1) There are two distinct components: the process enactment environment
    and the user interface facility. The former offers the basic mechanisms to
    execute a process model, while the latter provides the interface with users.
(2) In OIKOS and SPADE, the behavior of the user interface facility is not
    coupled with the paradigm of the PIL; that is, the behavior of the user
    interface does not depend on the semantics of the language. It is
    obtained through specific tools and by “programming” in PIL how these
    tools have to be managed.
(3) The interaction with external tools is accomplished through tool inte-
    gration facilities (Expo for OIKOS, BMS for EPOS, and FUSE for
    SPADE-1).
(4) They all exploit a distributed approach, in which (at least some of) the
    components of the PSEE are distributed over a network of workstations.
(5) There is only one centralized database in the environment.9
These are not the only alternatives that have been exploited in existing
PSEEs. We still lack reference architectures, which can be used to assess
and compare existing systems.

4.2 Interaction with Production Tools and Tool Integration Facilities
  OIKOS. In Expo 2.0, there are two classes of tools: load-and-go and
stand-by tools. Load-and-go tools (e.g., the cc compiler) are integrated by
means of an envelope mechanism, and interact with the process model at
the beginning and at the end of their execution. Stand-by tools interact
with the process, exchanging messages and service requests.



9
 For a taxonomy of the different alternatives that can be exploited to build the repository of a
PSEE, the reader can refer to Pueschel and Wolf [1993].

                 ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
308      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

  EPOS. Production tools are packaged (“enveloped”) as special task
subtypes, with the actual Unix tool as an “external procedure.” The script
implementing this procedure can include the invocation of messages for a
tool integration facility such as BMS. A model instance (a leaf task
instance) of such a type represents an actual tool invocation. An extra input
“parameter” to this task provides return information on actual tool perfor-
mance. Namely, this task can be reactivated many times to handle feed-
back from the tool. That is, such a task represents a small state machine.
   SPADE-1. Interaction with external tools and tool integration facilities
is achieved by two basic constructs in SLANG: the black transition and the
user place. A black transition is used to start any external Unix program
asynchronously. In this way, traditional Unix tools such as vi or cc can be
directly invoked and controlled by the SLANG interpreter. They are seen as
functions that provide results at the end of their execution. The filter
discussed in Section 4.1 is used to control more sophisticated tools that
offer a set of services through a programmatic interface (e.g., DEC FUSE).
In this case, black transitions are used to send messages to the filter and
from there to communicate with the tool integration facility. User places
are used to store tokens that describe events that occurred in the user
interaction environment and that were detected by the filter.
   The integration of environments such as FUSE into SPADE-1 has caused
substantial improvements to the tool integration facilities themselves. In
particular, FUSE is basically a single user environment; that is, each user
has its own instances of FUSE, and different instances (even of the same
user) cannot communicate to each other. In SPADE, the process engines
and the filter make it possible to reroute messages among different
instances of FUSE. Also, it is possible to exchange messages between
instances of heterogeneous tool integration facilities. For instance, it is
possible to catch, convert, and manipulate a FUSE message, and then to
forward it to a Tooltalk or an OLE2 tool.
  Other Systems. Most environments adopt an integration strategy that
exploits a tool integration facility. This is the case, for instance, of MERLIN
(Sun Tooltalk), Process Weaver (HP BMS), and Articulator/Synervision (HP
BMS).
  The other emerging technology that is being used in PSEEs is OMG
CORBA. For example, an interesting experimentation in this direction is
being carried out in the E3 project [Baldi and Dall’Anese 1995].
   Evaluation. In EPOS and SPADE-1, control integration is achieved
through tool integration facilities, such as FUSE, BMS, and Tooltalk. The
first problem that arises by using these products stems from the policies
used to reroute messages among tools. Actually, these tool integration
facilities assume that all tools are equivalent. Conversely, to integrate tools
effectively with a PSEE, it must be possible to declare the PSEE as a
special tool (an external “monitor”), capable of potentially receiving all
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     309

messages and dynamically determining which tools they shall be forwarded
to.
  A second problem is related to the integration of existing tools (a
posteriori integration). The adoption of a tool integration facility is partic-
ularly well suited for achieving a priori control integration. Namely, tools
have to be designed and built in order to make it possible for the PSEE to
control and invoke their services through the tool programmatic interface.
Notice that this strategy does not directly address the issue of providing
data integration; that is, it does not ensure that data are consistently
accessed by the PSEE and the tools. However, since these kinds of tools can
notify the environment about the operations they are going to accomplish
(e.g., opening a file), it is reasonably easy to check at the process engine
level that accesses to data are consistently accomplished and pursued.
  However, most existing tools do not offer a programmatic interface. It is
possible only to launch them and then trigger their termination. The
operations accomplished by the tool during its execution are not reported to
the environment (e.g., an open-file operation issued by a traditional text
editor). To integrate these kinds of tools, it is essential to offer mechanisms
and features to detect accesses to the file system. For this reason, ap-
proaches such as the one used in Provence are also necessary.
  In summary, tool integration facilities are effective means for providing
integration, because they make it possible to monitor and control tool
operations (including data accesses). They pose specific requirements on
the structure and features of tools. On the other hand, low-level operating
system mechanisms are needed to integrate those tools that do not offer
any explicit “hook” in order to control and monitor their behavior.

4.3 Behavior of the PSEE
  OIKOS. Historically, the first version of the OIKOS user interaction
environment was built to monitor the contents of the tuple spaces. It was
possible to view the contents of a tuple space, to add and remove tuples
from the tuple space, and to order them in ascending, descending, or
historical order. Recently, the user interaction environment has been
updated to a full graphical style where the tuple space is represented by
icons, and commands are directly applicable to the icons. The new user
interface is driven by a client in charge of maintaining the consistency
between the interface and the state of the tuple space and of reacting to
users’ requests.
  EPOS. Before work can start, a production workspace of files must be
established according to the given product/version/workspace description of
a corresponding subproject. The process engine maintains a graphical
display of the enacting task network and an agenda to guide the user. Tools
can be invoked either directly by the process engine or manually by the
user through the agenda.
  SPADE-1. A software developer using SPADE-1 interacts with the
environment through a set of tools. These tools are either existing produc-
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
310      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

tion tools that have been integrated in SPADE-1 or specific process tools
that have been developed to guide and support the user. This latter
category includes the process agenda and a simple shell interpreter that is
able to accept a command from the user and to forward a corresponding
message to the filter. Therefore, SPADE-1 has a nonintrusive approach
that tries to keep the presence of the PSEE environment hidden. Also, tools
like the agenda are completely decoupled from the PML; that is, their
semantics and behavior are explicitly “programmed” in the process model
being executed. These features have been introduced to enable the develop-
ment of different user interaction environments without changing the
SLANG semantics, the SLANG interpreter, and the SPADE-1 architecture
[Bandinelli et al. 1994b].
  Other Systems. In most existing environments, the user interface is
derived directly from the semantics of the PML, or at least, there are
specific elements of the user interface that are directly linked to the
semantics of the PSEE. For instance, in Leu (the industrial follow-up of
MELMAC) the user interface is made up of an agenda where each task
represents a transition of the underlying Petri-net-based process model.
Two systems that adopt an approach similar to SPADE-1 (i.e., the user
interface is decoupled from the PML semantics) are Process Weaver and
APPL/A.
  Evaluation. The view of the process offered to process participants
(software developers, project managers, etc.) is clearly a critical issue. In
previous sections, we have pointed out some of the problems that need to be
addressed. They can roughly be summarized with the following issues:

(1) What are the correct metaphors that have to be used by the PSEE to
    interact with the user?
(2) What is the correct level of abstraction to be used in the PSEE
    interface?
(3) How is the PSEE interface built and controlled? Is it directly coupled
    with the PML (PIL) paradigm, or is it decoupled from it? Namely, are
    the metaphors and the abstraction level of the PSEE interface directly
    derived from the PIL semantics?

The issue of coupled versus decoupled user interfaces in PSEEs has been
discussed in more detail by Bandinelli et al. [1994b]. The key issue is that
in a coupled approach the user interface behavior is derived from the PIL
semantics, while in a decoupled approach, it is “programmed” using the
PIL. In the former case, the state of the user interface can be derived
automatically from the state of the process enactment environment, but it
is constrained by the semantics of the PIL. In the latter case, the state of
the user interface has to be managed explicitly in the PIL specification, but
the behavior of the user interface is not constrained by the semantics of the
PIL.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     311

  EPOS is based on the coupled approach, whereas OIKOS and SPADE are
based on the decoupled approach. It is not clear yet from our experience
which is the correct approach to follow (coupled vs. decoupled) or if some
intermediate solution is feasible and convenient. Most existing systems
seem to prefer the coupled approach. Certainly, this is an open issue to be
further addressed.


4.4 Data Integration
  OIKOS. The OIKOS database is centralized, and every request is seri-
alized. The service layer abstracts this view, allowing the creation of a set
of independent repositories. Each repository is controlled by a service that
provides operations to move documents from the repository to the work-
space and vice versa, to lock documents, and to inspect the state of the
repository. The physical database is split into two parts: the description of
the documents is kept by Salad, while documents are stored as Unix files in
the distributed file system.
   EPOS. The client-server EPOS-DB stores the process model and main-
tains a versioned, nested, and cooperating transaction context. Products
are stored as long fields (software documents are stored as files) under full
control of the database. The database does not know anything about the
inner contents of the files, so no “semantic” data integration can be offered.
If products reside in internal development databases maintained by some
CASE tools, EPOS cannot easily provide integrated product and process
support.
   Given that EPOS-PM is separated from EPOS-DB through a Prolog
database interface, it should be possible to move to another (object-
oriented) database platform. The versioning and transaction facilities may
then have to be revised, although the version and transaction model are
orthogonal to each other and to the underlying data model. Note, however,
that versioning in EPOS-DB is provided at a basic (fragment) level inside
the database, and not by the user on top of the database (as in the
Damokles DBMS) or by the PCMS and ClearCase CM tools on top of some
DBMSs.
  SPADE-1. SPADE-1 stores all process models and process artifacts in
an object-oriented repository implemented using the O2 OODBMS. When
information has to be made available to a tool that is not based on O2 (e.g.,
any traditional Unix tool), it is checked out from the database and stored in
the file system (a temporary workspace). The reverse operation occurs
when the tool has completed its operation. Thus, data integration is
achieved by sharing O2 objects if the tool is built on top of the OODBMS.
For traditional tools, it is necessary to explicitly check in and check out
objects between the database and the file system. This is accomplished in
the prologue and epilogue of the code associated with a SLANG black
transition. The adoption of a sophisticated OODB to store all process
artifacts (including SLANG process models) introduces some performance
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
312      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

problems, particularly when interpreting queries and when parts of a
process model are recompiled after some change has been accomplished.
  Other Systems. OIKOS, EPOS, and SPADE-1 are all based on the same
approach: process artifacts are stored in a centralized object-oriented
database. To exchange information with tools that are not integrated with
the database, data are checked out and made available in temporary
workspaces.
  There are basically five other alternatives or variations to this approach,
which are represented by the following systems:
—In Process Weaver, there is no database. The PSEE relies directly on the
 file system where all of the artifacts are stored.10
—In ALF, artifacts are stored in PCTE, which provides a transparent
 replacement of the Unix file systems [Canals et al. 1994].
—In Provence, a dual approach is adopted, since artifacts are stored in the
 file systems and are described by additional information stored in the
 PSEE repository (i.e., an object base).
—In Leu, a traditional relational database is used (Oracle) to complement
 and enrich file system features [Dinkhoff et al. 1994].
—In APPL/A, persistency is supported directly by the language [Sutton et
 al. 1995].
  Evaluation. According to our experience, the problem of achieving effec-
tive data integration between production tools and the PSEE is one of the
most critical issues. Most production tools rely on workspaces that are
implemented using the file systems or proprietary database repositories.
Thus, if the PSEE has its own database, expensive check-in/check-out
operations must be defined to create and consistently manage temporary
workspaces. Alternatively, it is necessary to detect the invocation of file
system services at the operating system level.
  We envisage two dimensions of the problem:
(1) Strategically, we are interested in a standardization of technologies for
    PSEE databases, so that we can start migration of tools and diffusion of
    PSEE technology onto it. But what will this standard look like? Will it
    be some object-oriented language/interface (ODMG)? On the other
    hand, if we do not believe in any database standardization, one solution
    is not to have a PSEE database, as, for instance, in Process Weaver.
(2) Pragmatically, we must develop some reasonable solutions to await a
    possible database standardization. For us, this has been the adoption of
    a specific database technology, such as the commercial O2 in SPADE-1,
    the Salad prototype in OIKOS, and the proprietary EPOS-DB. This
    means that the PSEE is built around a dual approach, in which the
    central repository is temporarily and partially mirrored in file-based

10
   A research project is being carried out to integrate Process Weaver with the Adele system.
The resulting environment is called WEADELE.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
       Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                     •     313

     workspaces to support tool execution. This is similar to the approach
     adopted in Provence [Barghouti 1994].
We should also further explore the solution that is adopted in some systems
(e.g., ALF), where the file system is transparently seen as part of the PSEE
repository. In this way, existing tools do not need to be modified, while
their accesses to the file system can be trapped and controlled by the PSEE.

4.5 Inconsistency Management and Workspace Synchronization
   OIKOS. Workspaces are under control of a service. The files in a
workspace are accessed by the tools integrated in Expo 2.0. According to
this approach, consistency between the workspace state and its representa-
tion must be guaranteed by the service that manages the workspace.
Traditional tools like emacs cannot be controlled fully by the service since
they can create or manipulate files that are invisible to the tool envelope.
  EPOS. A workspace manager is responsible for check-in/check-out of
versioned files. A textual language (EPIT) is defined to enter new products
easily, and to express the difference between an old and a new product
structure. For process support to be effective inside of a transaction, the
external workspace and the internal process model database must be
“reasonably” in sync. The tools (especially a textual editor like emacs) can
be instrumented to send BMS messages to the process model upon struc-
tural changes in the product. The planner can reconstruct task networks
accordingly. To simulate a configuration management system with little
process support between check-out and check-in, there are configuration
management facilities for incremental check-in and for group check-in of
changes (big “delta”) after a workspace transaction has been accomplished.
  SPADE-1. SPADE-1 assumes that no operation on any process artifacts
can be accomplished outside the control of the PSEE. SLANG and SPADE-1
architecture have been conceived to allow strict control over tool behavior.
Clearly, this can be achieved only with those tools that provide specific
“hooks” to notify and control their behavior, for example, service-based
tools in the FIELD approach. More traditional tools such as vi are difficult
to control and monitor, since they do not allow the PSEE to trigger and
possibly prohibit the actions they are striving to accomplish.11
  Other Systems. An alternative to the approaches presented above is
based on the provision of mechanisms at the operating system level to
transparently see the file system as part of the repository and to define a
workspace model explicitly.
   Evaluation. In general, multiple descriptions of the same process enti-
ties may be stored in different parts of the PSEE or of its integrated tools.

11
 Environments such as FUSE include versions of popular tools (e.g., emacs) that have been
modified to be compliant with the requirement discussed so far. For instance, the editor
notifies the environment that it is going to open a file.

                ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
314      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

For instance, a broadcast message server has an internal configuration
table with tool and message definitions. This information must be kept
consistent with the tool definitions and scripts used in the process model to
invoke tools and to interact with them. These issues are not attacked by
any of the three PSEEs we have developed or by any other approach we
have studied.
  As for workspace synchronization, this issue is obviously related to the
problem of data integration. We can envisage intermediate solutions, such
as instrumenting Unix-based tools and services to inform the PSEE about
relevant file changes (partly done in EPOS and SPADE; see also Barghouti
[1994]).


4.6 Distribution and Heterogeneity
  OIKOS. Expo 2.0 is fully distributed on a network of Sun workstations.
Process engines (i.e., instances of the Patè interpreter) and tools can be
executed on any machine running under Expo 2.0.
  EPOS. EPOS-DB is a client-server database. Advanced CASE tools
exploit workspaces that are not easily integrated in the current architec-
ture, because of the impossibility of monitoring or trapping data accesses.
  SPACE-1. SPADE-1 exploits the client-server architecture of O2 to
distribute different processes over a network of workstations. Process
engines, the filter, tools, and the O2 server can be distributed over the
network. Moreover, the adoption of a standard technology for interprocess
communication (e.g., Unix sockets), and the availability of SPADE compo-
nents on a variety of platforms make it possible to use a network of
heterogeneous workstations as the operating environment. For instance, it
is possible to have the filter and some FUSE instances running on a
DECStation, and other SPADE components and FUSE instances running
on Sun workstations.
  Other Systems. Most existing PSEEs are based on a client-server ap-
proach. The issue of providing distributed and federated process support
has been specifically addressed in the Oz project, which has defined and
implemented policies and mechanisms to support integration of distributed
and heterogeneous PSEEs by exploiting the treaty and summit metaphors
[Ben-Shaul and Kaiser 1994].
   Evaluation. In our three systems, elementary distribution is taken care
of by standard local network facilities (e.g., RPC and sockets) and the
services using them (NFS, client-server databases, the X-Window user
interface, message servers). This allows client PSEEs to be run on hetero-
geneous machines, given that they can support the PIL in question. This is
easier for SPADE-1 than for EPOS and OIKOS, since the former is based
on more stable and widely available enabling technologies.
   In general, we still lack a clear architectural and functional characteriza-
tion of what a distributed and federated environment for process support
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     315

should look like. The only existing approach in this area is the Oz system,
which provides a specific approach to distributing and federating PSEEs.
Much work is still needed to understand the different policies that can be
used to distribute and federate PSEEs. For instance, we might have a
peer-to-peer cooperation with autonomous repositories, or a more abstract
approach, where data and process features are transparently distributed
over the network. We need to understand the basic mechanisms that the
PSEE should offer to support the definition of these different process-
specific policies.


4.7 Support for Measurement
None of the systems we are aware of provide specific support for measure-
ment, apart from the ability to write specific PML fragments that explicitly
collect data. Likewise, little support is provided to the process of establish-
ing a measurement program [Fuggetta et al. 1996].
   Evaluation. This is definitely one of the weakest areas in the entire
domain of software process technology, in the sense that so far there is
little effort to extend PSEEs to support the establishment and the opera-
tion of a measurement program. There are clearly a variety of issues
involved:

(1) Metrics cannot be defined once for all organizations. They have to be
    selected according to the goals, characteristics, and problems of each
    specific organization. We need methods and processes to create and
    operate a measurement program. Exploiting GQM is certainly an
    important step in this direction [Fuggetta et al. 1996].
(2) The PSEE should provide the infrastructure to effectively support the
    measurement program. There are two extreme approaches we can
    envisage:
    —The PSEE/PML does not provide any specific means. The measure-
      ment program is defined by the process engineer according to the
      process models (at different levels of abstraction). The collection of
      data is accomplished by exploiting the tools on hand or by “program-
      ming” in PIL the operation needed to collect specific information.
      This is the solution offered by the authors’ systems. It does not
      require any specific extension of the basic PIL/PSEE technology.
    —The PSEE/PML includes specific concepts and aids to support the
      measurement program. For instance, the PSL/PIL constructs may be
      included to decorate (at the requirement and design levels) process
      steps with information on the metrics to be collected. In turn, the
      PSEE/PIL may offer specific built-in mechanisms to support and,
      whenever possible, to automate the collection of data.

This is another area where we feel careful experimentation is necessary to
identify the most effective strategy.
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
316      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

4.8 Efficiency of the Implementation
   OIKOS. The efficiency of Expo 2.0 is very high, because the network
communication layer and all of the integration mechanisms are imple-
mented in C and use basic (and efficient) Unix services. The efficiency of
the database is low, because Salad requires a large amount of memory and
is based on a logical deductive technology. The Patè interpreter is another
bottleneck. Each instance of the Patè interpreter requires a large amount
of swap area, independently of the number and the contents of the tuple
space. The evaluation of the rules is slow, because no optimization tech-
nique has been used.
  EPOS. EPOS-DB is a bit slow (e.g., 100 new objects generated per
second). Presently, only type descriptors are cached at the clients, although
general caching of process model items (as Prolog facts) has been demon-
strated.
  EPOS-PM is slow due to the underlying Prolog. However, we have
optimized the process engine using triggers upon product change to support
incremental rule evaluation and execution.
  SPADE-1. The first prototype of SPADE-1 was developed to assess the
problems related to the development of a PSEE. The major performance
problems identified at that stage were the execution of dynamic queries,
the database performance, and the Petri nets interpretation algorithm. The
proliferation of Unix processes (e.g., the filter, process engines, the O2
server) and the heavy usage of interprocess communication mechanisms do
not have a strong impact on performance.
  In SPADE-1, Versions 2.0 and 3.0, a major design and implementation
effort has been devoted to amending the above-mentioned drawbacks. In
particular, a mixed interpretation/compilation approach has been adopted,
to improve the run-time performance while still preserving the reflexive
features of the language. The interpretation algorithm has been rewritten
to make it more incremental and to reduce the overhead related to
transition guards evaluation.
  Other Systems. This is a very difficult topic to discuss, since in most
cases it is not considered at all in the literature.
  Evaluation. Most authors claim that process activities are carried out
on a timescale of days or even months. So the operations accomplished by
the PSEE do not need to be particularly fast. This is just one side of the
coin. Indeed, if the PSEE is used to control and integrate tools, or to
support the interaction with the user, then performance becomes a critical
issue. Consider this example: In SPADE-1 any message exchanged by tools
may be trapped and reified in the Petri net. In this way, it is possible to
react to any message according to process-specific policies. This is certainly
a powerful facility since it makes it possible to flexibly coordinate and
control tools and, through them, the interaction with their users [Di Nitto
and Fuggetta 1995]. Most of these messages, however, are sent as a
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     317

consequence of a user’s request. The user is therefore waiting for some
reaction of the tool that, in turn, is waiting for some answer to the message
it sent out. So there is a turnaround time that is composed of the time
needed to deliver a message to SPADE-1 (e.g., the user via the editor wants
to open a file), the interpretation of the Petri net fragment dealing with the
message (e.g., does he or she play the role allowed to change this file?), and
the delivery of the answer to the tool (e.g., you can open the file). In this
case, the timescale is in the order of seconds (e.g., the delay a user can
tolerate when he or she invokes an “open file” operation. The SPADE-1
infrastructure must consistently ensure that the turnaround time is in the
same timescale. This affects the message exchange service, the process
engine interpretation algorithm, and the database access facility.
   This example is fairly representative of a wide set of cases and situations
where performances do have a significant impact on the usability and
effectiveness of the environment. Therefore, the claim that performance is
not a critical issue can be only partially supported, depending on the role
that the PSEE is requested to play in supporting users’ activities.

4.9 A General Issue: Usage of Standard Enabling Technology
A PSEE is a complex computerized system that must integrate and provide
a large variety of features and services, particularly when used to support
process enactment. To build such a system (i.e., the PIL run-time support),
it is worthwhile to reuse and exploit state-of-the-art enabling technology
(e.g., OODBMSs and distributed operating systems) [Fuggetta 1993]. The
usage of existing technology, however, poses several technical problems
(discussed in detail in the next paragraphs) and one strategic issue.
   In building SPADE-1, one of the strategic choices was not to reimplement
functionalities that can be reasonably (even if not completely) offered by
existing technology. Moreover, only commercially available products and
technology were considered (in particular, the O2 OODBMS, FUSE, and
C11 as the implementation language). In SPADE-1, therefore, there was a
deliberate choice to opt for a more mature, efficient, and interoperable
technology, with the price being less advanced features and functionalities
to base the development of the PSEE (the only exception is, partially, O2).
On the contrary, in OIKOS and EPOS the choice, at least in some cases,
was to opt for a more advanced technology (e.g., EPOS-DB and Prolog, and
the Salad deductive database), even if this could cause problems with the
exploitability at the industrial level.
   These two strategies represent a basic trade-off that we (as a research
community) are facing:
(1) The development of PSEEs can greatly benefit from the more recent
    research in domains such as databases or programming environments.
    This would facilitate the implementation of the advanced features
    required by PSEEs and PMLs.
(2) If we want to use PSEEs in real production environments, we need to
    consider the issues of efficiency, interoperability, and compatibility.
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
318      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

      This would demand more consolidated technologies, which could be less
      effective in prototyping, building, and testing advanced PSEE/PML
      features.
We believe that the need for experimenting with PSEEs in real settings is
so relevant that it makes the second option preferable.


5. EXPERIENCES

5.1 Reference Examples
  OIKOS. The standard ISPW-6 example has been completely specified in
Limbo and implemented in Patè. Work is in progress to complete the
specification of the ISPW-7 and ISPW-9 examples.
  EPOS. The ISPW-6 example has been completed. The development of
the ISPW-7 and ISPW-9 examples is in progress.
  SPADE-1. SLANG has been used to model reference examples such as
ISPW-6, ISPW-7, and ISPW-9.

5.2 Internal Experiments
  OIKOS. A large set of small examples has been used to test Limbo,
Patè, and Expo 2.0. Among them, the most relevant are
—a simple development environment based on the Cleanroom approach;
 and
—part of the KAOS requirement elicitation model, in cooperation with the
 University of Louvain, Louvain, Belgium.
  EPOS. Several internal examples have been developed, with work going
on to cover parts of EPOS itself (versioned product archive, change request
cycle, cooperation). Use of EPOS to support real industrial projects is not
foreseen other than as a demonstrator.
  SPADE-1. SLANG and SPADE-1 have been used to build several dem-
onstration processes, each of them aimed at evaluating different features of
the system. An integrated and comprehensive case study has been recently
completed [Bandinelli et al. 1995; 1996b].

5.3 Industrial Projects
   OIKOS. A large part of the PSS-05 model of the European Space Agency
has been specified and partly implemented in cooperation with Intecs
Sistemi, a software house operating in Pisa, Italy. Part of a proprietary
development methodology based on IDEF-0 has been modeled in coopera-
tion with Tecsiel, another software house operating in Pisa.
  EPOS. Several external cases have been simulated: parts of the Clean-
room approach and some industrial cases that are under way (from
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
     Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     319

PROTEUS and REBOOT ESPRIT projects, Sysdeco Consulting, and
Siemens Defense systems).
  SPADE-1. SLANG has been used to model industrial processes in a
large telecomm company in Italy [Bandinelli et al. 1995]. SPADE-1, Ver-
sion 3.0, has been released to a few companies within the context of two
ESPRIT projects. They are using SPADE-1 to support different processes,
including a distributed configuration management system for C11 librar-
ies and a complete software process based on Boehm’s Spiral Model.

5.4 Other Systems
There have been several experiences encountered in the research and
industrial community. Clearly, it is impossible to discuss them in detail
here. The reader may refer to Fuggetta and Picco [1994], which offers an
annotated bibliography of several interesting works.
  An additional source of information is the set of solutions to the ISPW
process example. One of the major goals achieved by the workshop is the
definition of a standard example, called the core problem, which is referred
to during the workshop as a common reference point. There are several
versions of this example, which have been used by many researchers to
assess and compare the features and characteristics of PSEEs and PMLs
[Kellner et al. 1990].

5.5 Evaluation
We must admit that our experiences in using research prototypes in real
industrial settings are still limited. Reference examples have proved to be
useful for accomplishing a preliminary assessment of each PSEE, for
comparing different solutions, and for identifying drawbacks and advan-
tages. Nonetheless, they are insufficient to provide an effective evaluation
of the technology in real comprehensive cases. We can summarize here the
problems we encountered in applying OIKOS, EPOS, and SPADE-1 in real
industrial settings:

(1) Business organizations are quite immature as far as processes are
    concerned. In many cases, they do not perceive the importance of
    making processes explicit. In other cases, they do not have the re-
    sources to invest in process improvement.
(2) Most of the technologies we have been developing are mainly oriented
    toward providing enactment assistance, while in many cases the most
    critical requirement is support for process comprehension, analysis,
    and documentation.
(3) We still do not know how to introduce a new technology effectively and
    incrementally in a production environment. A technology such as
    PSEEs may have a very strong impact or demand for a complex
    “transient” process. We need to reduce and limit the cost of this
    transition and the corresponding perturbation on ongoing activities.
             ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
320      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

(4) We need to better understand how to evaluate the impact that software
    process analysis and automation can have on real production environ-
    ments.
According to other published case studies and anecdotes, it appears that
these problems are related to the rather low maturity level of most
organizations. A possible correlation between the maturity of an organiza-
tion and the effectiveness of process technology can be summarized as
follows:
—Organizations at Level 1 or 2 of the CMM [Paulk et al. 1995] are more
 interested in PSLs and tools that help them to assess and describe how
 their organization works. They are also interested in evaluating and
 exploring different alternatives before processes are used in actual
 software development activities. So simulation and analysis facilities are
 certainly needed.
   Since most existing PMLs are just PILs, their adoption is quite
 difficult. These organizations are simply not able to proceed to the
 implementation of process support and, therefore, cannot exploit the
 features of this technology.
—In more mature organizations, existing technology can be much more
 effective. Organizations at Level 3 or higher have detailed and described
 processes (even if often just informally). PILs can be used to better detail
 these processes, to improve their applicability, and to increase the ability
 to track process performances [Bandinelli et al. 1995]. Moreover, since
 processes are already in use, PSEEs can be exploited to implement
 process support.
Certainly, much experimental work is still needed to consolidate and
further assess these observations.


6. RELATED WORK ON EVALUATING PSEEs
Papers that describe experiences in building and using software engineer-
ing environments are now easy to find. The field started more than 10
years ago. Many research prototypes have now become commercial sys-
tems, or at least, the concepts underlying their design are well understood
and have been exploited. However, the state of the art in PSEEs, where the
main emphasis is on the role of process modeling, is still immature. As we
discussed in the introduction, we have just reached the point where
industrial application of existing products has been started. Several prod-
ucts are available, and some research initiatives have reached the critical
stage in which prototypes begin to provide feedback to the designers. What
we really lack is a body of experiences and lessons learned to consolidate
our initial experimentation.
  We have carefully searched the current literature with limited success.
Many papers describe a single system, often based on the “show and tell”
approach. Comparisons can be found with specific aspects of the system,
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     321

such as the PML used, hints on the architecture, and so on. Other efforts
aim to define a coherent and, possibly, standard terminology. This is
typical of a young scientific field that experiences a rapid growth. A general
overview of PMLs and PSEEs is presented by Huff [1996] and Garg and
Jazajeri [1996], respectively.
   An assessment exercise similar to ours is described by Lonchamp [1994].
Lonchamp submitted a questionnaire to different research groups involved
in the development of PSEEs. The questionnaire identifies several key
issues and questions. The answers have been collected and summarized in
several tables, by associating to each system one or more keywords identi-
fying the answer to a given question. Certainly, it is very difficult to
synthesize via keywords the properties and characteristics of the PSEEs
being assessed. Moreover, different groups might interpret the same ques-
tion in different ways. Finally, the tables partially overlap, and therefore, it
may be difficult to get a general overview of the results.
   An interesting evaluation paper appears in the Proceedings of the 8th
International Software Process Workshop [Barghouti and Feiler 1993]. In
this paper, seven systems demonstrated at the workshop are compared
through the use of a grid that gives an overall view of the efforts. In
general, these workshops are characterized by the effort to mix experiences
coming from Europe, the United States, and Japan. The approach that has
been taken to conduct the comparison is based on a set of questions that
are related mainly to the use of the systems, rather than to their architec-
ture and underlying principles. In particular, the authors identify the
following main questions:

(1) What is the usability of the system?
(2) Who is the user of the system, and how does he or she interact with it?
(3) What were the main technical problems encountered while building the
    system?
(4) How easy is it for people to learn the system?
(5) Is the system really used?
(6) What is missing?
(7) How easy is the system to use?
(8) Who is in control, the user or the system?
(9) How are errors handled?
(10) How are models created and evaluated?
(11) What is the support for change?
(12) What is the support for the configuration management of process
     models?
(13) What is the level of abstraction of the concepts used in the process
     modeling language?

These questions raised a very interesting discussion, but they do not allow
the systematic evaluation of existing systems and, more importantly, they
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
322       •     Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

do not address the details of several technical issues related to the
development of PSEEs/PMLs (e.g., data and control integration).
  Another source of comments and experiences is the outcome of the
Promoter working group on Software Processes. This working group has
been established by the European Union in the Third Framework Pro-
gramme. It aims at facilitating and promoting the exchange of experiences
and results in the software process field. The final goal is the establishment
of a European research and industrial community in this area. There are
basically two initiatives that have been carried out by this group:

(1) a series of workshops on Software Process Technology that was started
    in 1991 and that has made possible the creation of a forum for
    discussing and comparing the different research efforts carried out in
    Europe (see Fuggetta et al. [1991], Derniame [1992], Warboys [1994],
    and Schäfer [1995]); the fifth edition of the workshop was held in
    Autumn 1996 in France [Montangero 1996]; and
(2) a book that summarizes the major projects carried out in Europe
    [Finkelstein et al. 1994].

Experiences in modeling a large number of processes can be found in
Scacchi and Mi [1993], which reports on the outcome of a modeling activity
that has covered more than 30 production processes, including both “as-is”
processes and those that represent new or alternative “to-be” processes. An
interesting comment on the distance between the real-world process and
the computerized process model can be found in Frailey [1993]. Here, the
domain is slightly different, being more oriented toward concurrent engi-
neering. In the “Lessons learned and conclusions” section of the paper,
Frailey writes,

      Processes are much more difficult to define than one first imagines. When
      forced to put things down on paper, the definition teams found that they
      did not always understand things the same way. The ensuing resolution
      process was very educational for all concerned, although at times it seemed
      like much ado about very little.
This observation puts new light on the importance of the higher phase of
the process-modeling metaprocess.
  Statements very close to those expressed in our work can be found in
Sutton [1993]. In the introduction, Sutton writes,

      In this paper I discuss properties of software process and process programs,
      analyze issues and conditions that affect the development and use of
      process programs, and indicate opportunities, limitations, and trade-offs
      that arise from these issues and conditions.
Among the properties that a process program must have, Sutton mentions
the importance of fitness (i.e., the ability of people to follow a process
definition) and precision. Finally, process modeling is characterized as an
intrinsically evolutionary activity, where both static and dynamic changes
must be properly taken into account.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
      Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                    •     323

7. EVALUATION OF THIS ASSESSMENT
Evaluating PSEEs is a very difficult task for a variety of reasons:

(1) PSEEs and PMLs are characterized by many features and components.
    There are several technical aspects to take into account, ranging from
    the paradigm of the language to the mechanisms used to interface tools.
    All of these different aspects contribute to the quality and effectiveness
    of a specific approach, even if none of them is more relevant and critical
    than the others.
(2) We lack a reference model and architecture that can be used to analyze
    and assess existing PSEEs. Authors present their approaches according
    to their own preferences and technical viewpoints, and it is conse-
    quently very difficult to accomplish a comparative analysis with the
    state of the art and between different systems.
(3) The application of process technology, even in trial cases, is expensive
    and time consuming. Moreover, the organization should be reasonably
    mature in order to effectively exploit the technology.
(4) The evaluation of the impact of process technology on real industrial
    processes has to be accomplished by taking into account different
    factors, ranging from economical benefits to social and human aspects.

For these reasons, it is quite difficult for a single organization or research
group to carry out a comparative assessment covering different systems.
The only reasonable way to pursue this activity is to create self-assessment
procedures that make it possible for each single organization to produce an
evaluation autonomously. To achieve this objective, we believe it is neces-
sary to pursue the following initiatives:

—The grid needs further refinements for early process lifecycle phases,
 user interfaces, and metaprocesses. Moreover, it is essential to relate and
 analyze PML and PSEE by jointly considering linguistics and architec-
 tural issues. We realize that in some cases the sharp distinction between
 PML and PSEE that we introduced in the grid might seem a bit
 unnatural.
—The ISPW examples we use to compare existing systems should be made
 more precise and general, in order to fully cover different process
 situations and to properly solicit and benchmark PSEE functionalities
 and features.
—It is essential to create a reference architecture (or alternative architec-
 tures) to make it easier to identify and compare the high-level structure
 of PSEEs.
—The self-assessment procedure should be conceived in order to guarantee
 a minimum level of homogeneity and to reduce the bias of the evaluator.

This article is a first step in this direction. Two other important contribu-
tions are the two international workshops on PSEE architectures, which
were held in Milano, Italy, in March 1995 [Bandinelli 1996] and in Irvine,
              ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
324      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

California, in February 1996. In these workshops, different PSEEs have been
presented and compared in order to progress toward a common understanding
and identification of a tentative reference architecture for PSEEs.



8. CONCLUSIONS
This article has presented an assessment grid for PSEEs. Three European
PSEEs and other existing approaches have been characterized according to
this grid. It has also been used to organize and illustrate lessons learned
and open issues in the PSEE area. The grid has been proven satisfactory,
but it needs extensions and improvements for early process lifecycle
phases, user interfaces, and metaprocesses. The emphasis of this article is
on providing an initial grid structure and on accomplishing an initial
application of the grid to evaluate its suitability.
  We strongly believe that it is important to look critically at our R&D
activities and to assess them according to the collected experiences by early
application of this technology to real (or realistic) software processes. The
problems and issues that need to be addressed in the near future can be
summarized by the following questions:

—Do we need one single PML or multiple, specialized PMLs?
—What is the right abstraction level for these different languages?
—Do we need specific paradigms (e.g., object orientation for product
 modeling), and which paradigm should be used for which kind of PML?
—What is the role of the PSEE database?
—What is the architecture of a PSEE, and what are its main components?
—What should the PSEE interface look like?
—How do we build the infrastructure (or run-time support) for PSEEs?
—What are the requirements that the development of PSEE poses to other
 technologies, such as distributed systems, databases, and tool integration
 facilities?
—How can and should a PSEE take advantage of the existing enabling
 technologies?
—How do we evaluate the impact that process technology can have on real
 production processes?
—How do we manage the introduction of this technology?
—. . . and many others!

We have tried to answer some of these questions by retrospectively looking
back at the work done in the last 3–5 years. We believe that it is necessary
to exchange information and opinions on these problems in order to move
the field toward a higher level of maturity and to offer a real breakthrough
to software development organizations.
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
       Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                      •     325

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks go to colleagues in the PROMOTER project, and to the local teams
behind OIKOS, EPOS, and SPADE. We also want to acknowledge the
useful comments and contributions of the anonymous reviewers.

REFERENCES

ABDEL-HAMID, T. K. AND MADNICK, S. 1991. Software Project Dynamics: An Integrated
 approach. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
AMBRIOLA, V., CIANCARINI, P., AND MONTANGERO, C. 1990. Enacting software processes in
 OIKOS. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on Software Development
 Environments (SDE 4). ACM, New York, 183–192.
AMBRIOLA, V., CIGNONI, G. A., AND MONTANGERO, C. 1994. The OIKOS services for object
 management in the software process. In Proceedings of the 3rd European Workshop on
 Software Process Technology (EWSPT 94). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 772.
 Springer-Verlag, New York, 2–14.
ARBAOUI, S. AND OQUENDO, F. 1994. PEACE: Goal-oriented logic-based formalism for pro-
 cess modeling. In Software Process Modeling and Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and
 B. Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
BALDI, M. AND DALL’ANESE, T. 1995. A distributed object-based system for process model
 enaction. Tech. Rep., Dipartimento di Automatica e Informatica, Politecnico di Torino,
 Turin, Italy.
BANDINELLI, S. 1996. Report on the workshop on Software Process Environment architec-
 ture. Softw. Process-Improv. Pract. 2, 1 (Mar.).
BANDINELLI, S., CERI, S., AND FELDER, M. 1996a. TANGO: A notation for describing ad-
 vanced transaction models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information
 Systems Analysis and Synthesis (July).
BANDINELLI, S., DI NITTO, E., AND FUGGETTA, A. 1994a. Policies and mechanisms to support
 process evolution in PSEEs. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on the
 Software Process (ICSP 3). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
BANDINELLI, S., DI NITTO, E., AND FUGGETTA, A. 1996b. Supporting cooperation in software
 development. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng 22, 12 (Dec.), 9 –20.
BANDINELLI, S., DI NITTO, E., FUGGETTA, A., AND LAVAZZA, L. 1994b. Coupled vs. decoupled
 user interfaces in PSEEs. In Proceedings of the 9th International Software Process Workshop
 (ISPW 9). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
BANDINELLI, S., FUGGETTA, A., GHEZZI, C., AND LAVAZZA, L. 1994c. SPADE: An environment
 for software process analysis, design, and enactment. In Software Process Modeling and
 Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B. Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press,
 London, U.K.
BANDINELLI, S., FUGGETTA, A., LAVAZZA, L., LOI, M., AND PICCO, G. 1995. Modeling and
 improving an industrial software process. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 21, 5 (May).
BARGHOUTI, N. S. 1994. Separating process model enactment from process execution in
 Provence. In Proceedings of the 9th International Software Process Workshop (ISPW-9).
 IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
BARGHOUTI, N. S. AND FEILER, P. H. 1993. Demonstration experience report sessions sum-
 mary. In Proceedings of the 8th International Software Process Workshop (ISPW 8) (Wadern,
 Germany). IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, Calif., 2–5.
BEN-SHAUL, I. Z. AND KAISER, G. 1994. A paradigm for decentralized process modeling and
 its realization in the Oz environment. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
 Software Engineering (May). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
BRUYNOOGHE, F., GREENWOOD, R. M., ROBERTSON, I., SA, J., AND WARBOYS, B. C. 1994.
 PADM: Towards a total process modeling system. In Software Process Modeling and
 Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B. Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press,
 London, U.K.
CANALS, J., BOUDJLIDA, N., DERNIAME, J. C., GODART, C., AND LONCHAMP, J. 1994. ALF: A
 framework for building process-centered software engineering environments. In Software

                 ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
326      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

  Process Modeling and Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B. Nuseibeh, Eds.
  Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
CHIMENTI, D., GAMBA, R., KRISHNAMURTHY, R., NAQVI, S., TSUR, S., AND ZANIOLO, C. 1990.
  The LDL system prototype. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2, 1 (Mar.).
CONRADI, R., FERNSTRÖM, C., AND FUGGETTA, A. 1994a. Concepts for evolving software
  processes. In Software Process Modeling and Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B.
  Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
CONRADI, R., LIU, C., AND HAGASETH, M. 1995. Planning support for cooperating transac-
  tions in EPOS. Inf. Syst. 20, 4 (June), 317–326.
CONRADI, R., HASGASETH, M., LARSEN, J.-O., NGUYÊN, M. N., MUNCH, B. P., WESTBY, P. H., ZHU,
  W., JACCHERT, M. L., AND LIU, C. 1994b. EPOS: Object-oriented cooperative process
  modeling. In Software Process Modeling and Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B.
  Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
CURTIS, B., KELLNER, M., AND OVER, J. 1992. Process modeling. Commun. ACM 35, 9 (Sept.).
DERNIAME, J. C., Ed. 1992. Proceedings of EWSPT 92 (2nd European Workshop on Software
  Process Technology). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 635. Springer-Verlag, New
  York.
DI NITTO, E. AND FUGGETTA, A. 1995. Integrating process technology and CSCW. In Proceed-
  ings of the 4th European Workshop on Software Process Technology. Lecture Notes in
  Computer Science, vol. 913. Springer-Verlag, New York.
DINKHOFF, G., GRUHN, V., SAALMANN, A., AND ZIELONKA, M. 1994. Business process modeling
  in the workflow management environment LEU. In Proceedings of the 13th International
  Conference on the Entity-Relationship Approach. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
  881. Springer-Verlag, New York.
FEILER, P. AND HUMPHREY, W. 1993. Software process development and enactment: Concept
  and definitions. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on the Software Process
  (ICSP 2) (Berlin, Germany). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
FERNANDEZ, M. F. AND ZDONIK, S. B. 1989. Transaction groups: A model for controlling
  cooperative work. In 3rd International Workshop on Persistent Object Systems, Their Design,
  Implementation and Use (Jan.). 341–350.
FERNSTRÖM, C. 1993. Process Weaver: Adding process support to UNIX. In Proceedings of
  the 2nd International Conference on the Software Process.
FINKELSTEIN, A., KRAMER, J., AND NUSEIBEH, B., Eds. 1994. Software Process Modeling and
  Technology. Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
FRAILEY, D. J. 1993. Concurrent engineering and the software process. In Proceedings of the
  2nd International Conference on the Software Process (ICSP 2) (Berlin, Germany). IEEE
  Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, Calif.
FUGGETTA, A. 1993. A classification of CASE technology. IEEE Computer 26, 12 (Dec.),
  25–38.
FUGGETTA, A. AND GHEZZI, C. 1994. State of the art and open issues in PSEEs. J. Syst.
  Softw. 26, 1 (July), 53– 60.
FUGGETTA, A. AND PICCO, G. P. 1994. An annotated bibliography on software process
  improvement. ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes 19, 4 (July), 66 – 68.
FUGGETTA, A. AND WOLF, A., Eds. 1996. Trends in Software: Software Process. Vol. 4. John
  Wiley and Sons, New York, 160.
FUGGETTA, A., CONRADI, R., AND AMBRIOLA, V., Eds. 1991. Proceedings of the 1st European
  Workshop on Software Process Modeling. AICA (Italian National Association for Computer
  Science), Milan, Italy.
FUGGETTA, A., GHEZZI, C., MANDRIOLI, D., AND MORZENTI, A. 1993. Executable specification
  with dataflow diagrams. Softw. Pract. Exper. 23, 6 (June), 629 – 693.
FUGGETTA, A., LAVAZZA, L., MORASCA, S., CINTI, S., OLDANO, G., AND ORAZI, E. 1996. Applying
  G/Q/M in an industrial software factory. Tech. Rep., CEFRIEL, Milano, Italy.
GARLAN, D. AND SHAW, M. 1993. An introduction to software architecture. In Advances in
  Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, V. Ambriola and G. Tortora, Eds. World
  Scientific Publishing Co.

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
       Assessing Process-Centered Software Engineering Environments                     •     327

GARG, P. AND JAZAJERI, M. 1996. PSEEs: A grand tour. In Trends in Software: Software
  Process, A. Fuggetta and W. Wolf, Eds. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
GARG, P., MI, P., PHAM, T., SCACCHI, W., AND THUNQUEST, G. 1994. The SMART approach for
  software process engineering. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
  Software Engineering. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
GRUHN, V. AND JEGELKA, R. 1992. An evaluation of FUNSOFT nets. In Proceedings of the
  2nd European Workshop on Software Process Technology (EWSPT 92). Lecture Notes in
  Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, New York.
HUFF, K. 1996. Software process modeling. In Trends in Software: Software Process, A.
  Fuggetta and W. Wolf, Eds. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
HUFF, K. AND LESSER, V. 1989. A plan-based intelligent assistant that supports the software
  development process. In Proceedings of the 3rd Software Engineering Symposium on
  Practical Software Development Environments.
IEEE. 1994. Special issue on measurement-based process improvement. IEEE Softw. 11, 4
  (July).
IIDA, H., MIMURA, K., INOUE, K., AND TORII, K. 1994. Hakinowa: Monitor and navigation
  system for cooperative software development. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
  Conference on the Software Process.
JUNKERMANN, G., PUESCHEL, B., SCHÄFER, W., AND WOLF, S. 1994. MERLIN: Supporting
  cooperation through a knowledge-based environment. In Software Process Modeling and
  Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B. Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press,
  London, U.K.
KAISER, G., POPOVICH, S., AND BEN-SHAUL, I. Z. 1993. A bi-level language for software
  process modeling. In Proceedings of 15th International Conference on Software Engineering
  (ICSE 15) (Baltimore, Md.). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
KATAYAMA, T. 1989. A hierarchical and functional software process description and its
  enaction. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Software Engineering.
KELLNER, M., FEILER, P., FINKELSTEIN, A., KATAYAMA, T., OSTERWEIL, L., PENEDO, M., AND
  ROMBACH, H. D. 1990. Software process modeling example problem. In Proceedings of the
  6th International Software Process Workshop. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos,
  Calif., 19 –29.
KORTH, H., KIM, W., AND BANCILHON, F. 1985. A model of CAD transactions. In Proceedings
  of the 11th International Conference on Very Large Databases. VLDB Endowment, Saratoga,
  Calif., 25–33.
KRAMER, J. AND MAGEE, J. 1990. The evolving philosophers problem: Dynamic change
  management. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 16, 11 (Nov.), 1293–1306.
KRISHNAMURTHY, B. AND BARGHOUTI, N. 1993. Provence: A process visualization and enact-
  ment environment. In Proceedings of 4th European Software Engineering Conference (ESEC
  93). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 717. Springer-Verlag, New York, 451– 465.
LONCHAMP, J. 1993. A structured conceptual and terminological framework for software
  process engineering. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on the Software
  Process (ICSP 2) (Berlin, Germany). IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, Calif.
LONCHAMP, J. 1994. An assessment exercise. In Software Process Modeling and Technology,
  A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B. Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
MADHAVJI, N. AND SCHÄFER, W. 1991. Prism-methodology and process-oriented environ-
  ment. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 17, 12 (Dec.), 1270 –1283.
MI, P. AND SCACCHI, W. 1990. A knowledge-based environment for modeling and simulating
  software engineering processes. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2, 3 (Mar.).
MONTANGERO, C. 1995. In favour of a coherent process coding language. In Proceedings of
  the 4th European Workshop on Software Process Technology. Lecture Notes in Computer
  Science, vol. 913. Springer-Verlag, New York.
MONTANGERO, C., Ed. 1996. Proceedings of the 5th European Workshop on Software Process
  Technology (EWSPT 96) (Nancy, France, Oct.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
  1149. Springer-Verlag, New York.

                ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
328      •      Vincenzo Ambriola et al.

MONTANGERO, C. AND AMBRIOLA, V. 1994. OIKOS: Constructing process-centered SDEs. In
  Software Process Modeling and Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B. Nuseibeh,
  Eds. Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
PAULK, M. C., WEBER, C. V., CURTIS, B., AND CHRISSIS, M. B., Eds. 1995. The Capability
  Maturity Model: Guidelines for Improving the Software Process. Software Engineering Inst.,
  Carnegie-Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, Pa., and Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.
PUESCHEL, B. AND WOLF, S. 1993. Architectural support for distributed process-centered
  software development environments. In Proceedings of the 8th International Software
  Process Workshop (ISPW 8) (Dagstuhl, Germany, Mar.). IEEE Computer Society, Washing-
  ton, D.C.
RABBI, S. AND OQUENDO, F. 1994. PEACE: Goal-oriented logic-based formalism for process
  modeling. In Software Process Modeling and Technology, A. Finkelstein, J. Kramer, and B.
  Nuseibeh, Eds. Research Studies Press, London, U.K.
SCACCHI, W. AND MI, P. 1993. Experiences in the modeling, analysis, and simulation of
  formalized software processes. In Proceedings of the 8th International Software Process
  Workshop (ISPW 8) (Dagstuhl, Germany). IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos,
  Calif.
SCHÄFER, W., Ed. 1995. Proceedings of the 4th European Workshop on Software Process
  Technology (EWSPT 95) (Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands, Apr.). Lecture Notes in Com-
  puter Science, vol. 913. Springer-Verlag, New York.
SCHÄFER, W. AND WOLF, S. 1994. Cooperation patterns for process-centered software devel-
  opment environments. Tech. Rep., Dept. of Computer Science, Univ. of Dortmund, Dort-
  mund, Germany.
SKARRA, A. 1989. Concurrency control for cooperating transactions in an object-oriented
  database. SIGPLAN Not. 24, 4 (Feb.), 466 – 473.
SNOWDON, R. 1992. An example of process change. In Proceedings of the 2nd European
  Workshop on Software Process Technology (EWSPT 92). Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
  vol. 635. Springer-Verlag, New York.
SUTTON, S. 1993. Opportunity, limitations, and trade-offs in process programming. In
  Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on the Software Process (ICSP 2) (Berlin,
  Germany). IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, Calif.
SUTTON, S., HEIMBIGNER, D., AND OSTERWEIL, L. 1995. APPL/A: A language for software
  process programming. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 4, 3 (July), 221–286.
WARBOYS, B., Ed. 1994. Proceedings of the 3rd European Workshop on Software Process
  Technology (EWSPT 94). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 772. Springer-Verlag, New
  York.

Received December 1994; revised May 1995 and August 1996; accepted February 1997




ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, Vol. 6, No. 3, July 1997.
