                                         Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques

                                                         Lloyd Montgomery, Clara Lüders, Walid Maalej

                                                                      University of Hamburg
                                                                    Department of Informatics
                                                          Vogt-Kölln-Str. 30, Hamburg 22527, Germany
                                             {lloyd.montgomery,clara.marie.lueders,walid.maalej}@uni-hamburg.de
arXiv:2403.05716v2 [cs.SE] 11 Jul 2024




                                               Abstract. An issue tracker is a software tool used by organisations to
                                               interact with users and manage various aspects of the software develop-
                                               ment lifecycle. With the rise of agile methodologies, issue trackers have
                                               become popular in open and closed-source settings alike. Internal and
                                               external stakeholders report, manage, and discuss “issues”, which repre-
                                               sent different information such as requirements and maintenance tasks.
                                               Issue trackers can quickly become complex ecosystems, with dozens of
                                               projects, hundreds of users, thousands of issues, and often millions of is-
                                               sue evolutions. Finding and understanding the relevant issues for the task
                                               at hand and keeping an overview becomes difficult with time. Moreover,
                                               managing issue workflows for diverse projects becomes more difficult as
                                               organisations grow, and more stakeholders get involved. To help address
                                               these difficulties, software and requirements engineering research have
                                               suggested automated techniques based on mining issue tracking data.
                                               Given the vast amount of textual data in issue trackers, many of these
                                               techniques leverage natural language processing. This chapter discusses
                                               four major use cases for algorithmically analysing issue data to assist
                                               stakeholders with the complexity and heterogeneity of information in
                                               issue trackers. The chapter is accompanied by a follow-along demonstra-
                                               tion package with JupyterNotebooks.

                                               Keywords: Natural language processing · Issue trackers · Software en-
                                               gineering · Requirements engineering · Mining software repositories


                                         1   Introduction

                                         It is rare to find a software organisation today that does not use an issue tracker
                                         to support some—if not all—of their processes. Users, developers, testers, and
                                         managers use issue trackers to report and collect issues such as bug reports.
                                         Subsequently, the issues get discussed, prioritised, assigned as a unit of work,
                                         tracked, and eventually resolved, thereby resulting in updated software. In ad-
                                         dition to bug reports, issue trackers nowadays often collect other issue types
                                         including epics, user stories, tasks, and change requests. This diversity of in-
                                         formation types makes these tools indispensable for various software processes
                                         including requirements elicitation, bug fixing, product design, user support, and
                                         quality assurance. Issue trackers are so adaptive that, in reality, they can store
2       Montgomery et al.

anything that needs to be tracked and that can fit into the schema of a title,
description, and metadata.
    Once filed, issues can contain several supported fields such as issue type,
status, comments, severity, priority, project, components, labels, issue links, sub-
tasks, creator, reporter, assignee, etc. What makes issues so powerful is that they
are atomic units separated from the rest of the project (and can thus be created,
viewed, and edited in isolation). When desired, issues can also be linked to the
project or the corresponding product in different ways. They can be grouped
together under components, share a set of labels with other issues, be directly
structured under other issues as sub-issues, or be linked to other issues denoting
various types of dependencies. Figure 1 shows an example of an issue in the
Qt Jira issue tracker: QTBUG-76315.1 The title is displayed across the top.
The other fields are scattered around the interface, including the issue “Type”
(Suggestion), the short description, and the comments at the bottom.




                   Fig. 1. An example of an issue report in Jira.

1
    https://bugreports.qt.io/browse/QTBUG-76315
                            Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques         3

    One fundamental defining difference between issues is the chosen value for
the “Issue Type” field, which can, for example, be “Bug Report”, “Epic”, “User
Story”, “User Support”, etc. The description for an Epic is to be interpreted
differently than the description for a User Story, which is to be interpreted dif-
ferently than a Bug Report, etc. In other words, the Issue Type clearly separates
issues into different functions for the software development lifecycle and how the
issues should be tracked and managed. Montgomery et al. [36] performed a the-
matic analysis of unique issue types across various public Jira issue trackers and
found that the majority of them can be grouped into four issue categories:

 – Requirements issues including epics, user stories, as well as feature re-
   quests and change requests.
 – Development issues document the development work breakdown into as-
   signed tasks, including technical tasks, development tasks, and sub-tasks.
 – Maintenance issues including reported bugs, defects, incidents, technical
   debts, or documentation issues.
 – User support issues representing dialogues between developers and users,
   as support requests, problem tickets, IT help requests, or questions.

    With time, the vast amount of generated and continuously evolving software
project data gets reflected in issue trackers and often overwhelms their users [3,1].
Issue trackers can accumulate thousands or even millions of reports throughout
the lifetime of a project [1,43]. Such overload of issue information might itself im-
pact productivity and decision-making [23,13]. Moreover, the flexibility of issue
trackers and the low usage barrier for stakeholders with different backgrounds,
skills, and motivations can lead to redundant [52], ambiguous [12], or conflicting
issue data [55]. Possible consequences include poor issue report quality, intricate
issue triage, delayed issue resolution, and communication difficulties [4,8,56,51].
    To address the challenges of an overwhelming amount of heterogeneous and
often ambiguous issue-related information, Natural Language Processing (NLP)
techniques bear a large potential [53]. This chapter delivers a detailed overview
of issue tracking data, along with algorithmic approaches to support stakehold-
ers dealing with these challenges. We first discuss popular issue trackers, their
main usage, as well as the structure and semantic of data that is normally main-
tained therein. Then, we discuss four use cases for using NLP techniques on issue
tracking for the analysis of requirements quality, issue evolution, discussions, as
well as link and traceability analysis. The common enabler is to combine text
data with meta and historical data.


2   Fundamentals of Issue Trackers

In this section, we discuss the importance of issue tracking for software organi-
sations and compare popular issue trackers and publicly available issue datasets.
We also describe the data normally found in most issue trackers.
4       Montgomery et al.

2.1   Roles of Issue Trackers
Issue trackers are designed to assist stakeholders in communicating, document-
ing, and collaborating on project-related issues during the entire software devel-
opment lifecycle. It is difficult to think about a software organisation or an open-
source community without also thinking about their Jira, GitHub, Bugzilla, or
Redmine repository. These tools play an important role from the Requirements
Engineering (RE) and Software Engineering (SE) perspective:

Issue Elicitation and Just-In-Time RE. The primary goal of issue trackers
is to collect issues as they arise. Usually, issues can be reported by various stake-
holders: both by the core software team including developers, managers, and
product owners, as well as by users, customers, and other stakeholders. From an
RE perspective, issue trackers created a direct avenue for just-in-time require-
ments [11] and crowd-based requirements [18,19]. With properly managed and
maintained issue trackers, a constant stream of just-in-time “requirements” can
emerge from the community: first filed as requests or reports and then discussed,
clarified, and eventually accepted as requirements. Recent approaches also bring
user feedback and community data (e.g. such as tweets and product reviews) into
the issue trackers [19]. In addition, requirements elicited through conventional
activities such as interviews and workshops can be added by analysts and prod-
uct owners, e.g. as epics, user stories, features, or use cases. Overall, issue trackers
support both traditional and fast, just-in-time, crowd-based requirements elici-
tation and management through features such as ease-of-use reporting, attaching
and linking additional information, and open discussions in the comments.

User Support. Issue trackers are sometimes also called ticket systems: denoting
user requests being processed. One reason issue trackers have gained popular-
ity is their ability to directly support users alongside other related development
activities. User support differs from other tasks such as managing bug and secu-
rity reports in that it primarily involves the questions, concerns, thoughts, and
feelings of the users. This is a central component of customer relationship man-
agement [44]. In other words, user support is as concerned with the user’s state of
mind as with the software issue they are experiencing. Issue trackers can support
this workflow—publicly or privately, and allow the communication, notification,
and direct linking to related bug reports, requests, release schedules, etc. This
creates forward traceability (and accountability) from user concerns to organi-
sational action, and backwards traceability (rationale) for related organisational
decisions.

Communication and Collaboration. Organisations, particularly open-source
communities, use issue trackers as a central place for communication and col-
laboration [5,34]. The central communication tools for communities were once
mailing lists and forums, where each thread represented a single discussion about
a bug, feature, or wider topic. Now, many of those discussions are held in the
                            Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques        5

comments sections of corresponding issues, assisted by further features such as
labelling, linking, or watching certain issues and their discussions [2]. Beyond
communication, the workflow management built around issues facilitates collab-
oration within teams and with external stakeholders. For instance, once an issue
gets resolved by a developer, a workflow can be configured to notify someone to
review, integrate, or conduct manual acceptance test (and activate corresponding
issues). Similarly, once a task gets blocked or certain actions and clarifications
are needed, particular discussions or workflows can be triggered, e.g. based on
issue status, priority, or component that has changed.



Git-Extended Knowledge Repository. Modern issue trackers can be con-
sidered extended knowledge repositories for software organisations. New mem-
bers joining the project or the organisation can start familiarising themselves by
checking current issues, as well as the overall state of the issue tracker [46]. In
addition to information about the projects, organisation, and people, issue track-
ers include other integrated information about the systems under development
including the code, versions, documentation, and binaries [32,33]. While code
repositories using Git or SVN capture most of what is necessary when it comes
to versioning the code and software components, it rarely captures or links the
other project artefacts such as requirements, bug reports, or a roadmap. On the
other hand, issue trackers enable a rich knowledge repository accessible by dif-
ferent stakeholders due to their low technical barrier. For instance, code changes
resulting from an issue are usually traced to Git commits and the rationale be-
hind them (whether for bug fixing, feature enhancement, or any other reason).
Similarly, binaries, release notes, tests and quality artefacts are either managed
or linked to issues and projects as well.



Project and Workflow Management. Modern issue trackers usually offer
functionality to plan and manage projects, releases, and roadmaps based on the
issues. Some issue trackers also offer advanced features to implement a Kanban or
a Scrum process. Since the issues are already in the repository, this is a pragmatic
step instead of using a separate project management tool. Issue trackers have
also enabled a transparent and configurable approach to managing stakeholders’
workflows through issue statuses and conversations. The community involved in
(or just interested in) the development of a particular product can, for example,
see the workflow of requirements as they are created, discussed, assigned to
sprints, worked on, tested, and delivered. This transparency allows interested
stakeholders to directly identify the software version a particular requirement
is attached to, and know when and how the outcomes of that requirement will
be delivered. Similarly, stakeholders interested in particular bug reports can see
if their problem is already reported, if similar bug reports have similar details,
they can check the status and know if it is being addressed or ignored, and they
can also see when the finalised fix for that bug is released.
6       Montgomery et al.

              Table 1. Comparison across popular issue trackers [41].

         High-level feature      JIRA Redmine Mantis Bugzilla GitHub
         Custom fields             X        X        X       X          X
         Custom dashboards         X        X        -       X          X
         Custom workflows          X        -        X       X          -
         Issue links               X        X        X       X          X
         Link typology             X        X        X       X*         -
         Duplicate management      X        X        X       X          X
         Release management        X        -        -        -         X
         Add-ons/plugins           X        X        X       X          -
         API integration           X        X        X       X          X
          * Except depends-on, blocks, see-also, and duplicate, link types
          are difficult to customise.



2.2   Examples of Issue Trackers

Among advanced issue trackers known for their extensive features such as cus-
tomisable issue fields, release planning, and project management, notable options
include Jira,2 Redmine,3 Mantis,4 Bugzilla,5 and GitHub.6 Table 1 presents a
comparative analysis based on high-level feature coverage. These issue trackers
manage diverse issue types such as “Epic”, “Bug Report”, “User Story”, and
“Task”, allowing users to categorise and structure their issues effectively. Addi-
tionally, they enable users to define the scope of issues within the product or
specific components while offering a spectrum of statuses. However, it’s worth
noting that disparities exist among these platforms. Bugzilla and Mantis, for in-
stance, lack support for custom issue types or statuses, constraining their users
to the predefined “Bug” type. In contrast, both Redmine and Jira provide the
flexibility of defining custom issue types and statuses, catering to the nuanced
requirements of diverse projects.
    Karre et al. [25] conducted an in-depth analysis of 31 prominent issue-tracking
tools to identify their features and distinctions. The authors classified these 31
OSS issue-tracking tools into four distinct clusters based on various features in-
cluding API support, test plan integration, customisable workflows, and custom
field support. Jira was not included in this analysis [25]. Cluster 1 includes tools
that offer a wide range of features, such as test plan integration, customisable
workflows, and product roadmap planning. Notable tools in this cluster includes
Bugzilla, Mantis, and Redmine. Cluster 2 consists of simpler yet highly effec-
tive tools known for their strong support for code repositories and localisation.
Prominent tools in this cluster includes GitHub and BitBucket. Cluster 3 excels
2
  https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira
3
  https://redmine.org/
4
  https://www.mantisbt.org/
5
  https://www.bugzilla.org/
6
  https://github.com/
                                  Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques                                7

                                Table 2. Issue Tracker Datsets

Dataset                 Year Tracker        # Issues URL
Lamkanfi et al.         2013   Bugzilla   214,908 https://github.com/ansymo/msr2013- bug_dataset
Lazar et al.            2014   Bugzilla 1,674,985 †http://www.csis.ysu.edu/~alazar/msr14data
Zhu et al.              2016   Bugzilla   774,809 https://github.com/jxshin/mzdata
Rahim et al.            2017   Redmine     13,820 †https://github.com/shamsurrahim/RedmineDataset
Gousios                 2013   GitHub          — https://github.com/ghtorrent
Kallis et al.           2022   GitHub     803,417 —
Nikeghbal et al.        2023   GitHub          — https://github.com/kargaranamir/girt- data
Ortu et al.             2015   Jira       700,000 †http://openscience.us/repo/social- analysis/socialaspects.html
Tawosi et al.           2022   Jira       508,963 https://github.com/SOLAR- group/TAWOS
Montgomery et al.       2022   Jira     2,686,282 https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.5882881
Diamantopoulos et al.   2023   Jira            — —
 †These URLs were already broken at the time of publishing this chapter.




in providing robust authentication features and standard reporting capabilities.
Noteworthy tools in this cluster includes BugTraq and JTrac. Cluster 4 focuses
on features related to notifications and command-line support, including Trac,
among others.


2.3    Issue Tracking Datasets

Despite the large amount of research in the area of issue trackers, access to
large and rich issue tracker datasets remains rather limited. The GitHub7 issue
tracker hosts millions of public repositories. The status quo for most other issue
trackers, however, is private hosting, often locally hosted on institutional servers,
accessed through hidden or intranet domains. While GitHub is a good source
of issue repositories, it also represents only one specific issue tracker, lacking
some common features such as custom linking, issue types, workflows, etc. Over
the last decade, researchers have collected and released several issue tracker
datasets—most of the time to address a specific research goal.
    Lamkanfi et al. [26] built a Bugzilla dataset containing only genuine bug
reports from Eclipse and Mozilla projects. The dataset covers the complete life-
time of each bug report, including the updates for each field. This dataset can
be used for severity prediction, studying bug-fixing time, or wrongly assigned
components. Lazar et al. [28] built a dataset for duplicate detection that encom-
passes data from the Bugzilla repositories of Eclipse, Open Office, NetBeans, and
Mozilla. The dataset contains duplicate issues as well as random non-duplicates.
It is used for researching duplicate detection models. Zhu et al. [54] also built a
dataset from Mozilla’s issue tracker. Their dataset contains issue reports proper-
ties, activities, and comments. They used the dataset for issue assignment, issue
fixing time, and developer participation prediction.
    Rahim et al. [42] built a dataset from Redmine to examine issue starvation,
meaning that issues with lower severity or priority do not get enough resources
to be resolved. Their dataset encompasses issues and issue-report properties.
7
    https://github.com/
8       Montgomery et al.

    Gousios [17] created the popular and extensive GHTorent dataset of GitHub
data, which encompasses various projects, issues, users, commits, and pull-
request information. The dataset can be used for collaboration and network
analysis studies. Kallis et al. [24] created a GitHub dataset with 803,417 issues
reports extracted from 127,595 open-source GitHub projects for a research com-
petition hosted by the Natural Language-based Software Engineering Workshop
(NLBSE). The dataset encompasses issue report information, which was used
for issue type classification. Nikeghbal et al. [39] also mined data from GitHub
to create an issue dataset that enable examining the usage of issue templates.
    Ortu et al. [40] created a Jira dataset for Apache, Spring, JBoss, and Code-
Haus communities to analyse the communication processes. This dataset con-
tains issue reports and corresponding comments. Tawosi et al. [47] crawled public
Jira repositories that use agile approaches. They mined more than half a million
issues from 44 open-source projects. This dataset can be used, e.g., for effort es-
timation, issue prioritisation, or issue assignment. Montgomery et al. [36] built
a large Jira dataset with the issue reports from 16 different organisations and
all their projects, resulting in 2.7 million issues, 32 million changes, 9 million
comments, and 1 million issue links. This is a rather general purpose dataset,
which can be used for various goals including issue link prediction, discussion,
or evolution analysis. Diamantopoulos et al. [10] mined the Jira repository of
Apache in 2023 and used topic modelling to enhance the dataset.

2.4    Issue Tracking Data
Issue trackers contain an assortment of data from natural language text to struc-
tured meta-data. We summarise five different types of data found in issue track-
ers and which can be used for different purposes. Figure 2 gives an overview of
the data usually available in a Jira repository. To discuss the data structure, we
use Jira as an example, as it is one of the most popular and functionality-rich
issue trackers in practice.

Core Issue Data (Content). An issue has two primary fields capturing it
core information: Summary, Description. While the data is usually natural text,
description can also include formatted text as well as attachments and images.
The core issue data is usually available at the issue creation time
    The Summary (or title) provides a brief overview of the information contained
in the issue. For example: “Allow toggling every single projector’s ability to
cast a shadow separately” is a summary of STORM-2147 from SecondLife.8
The Summary field alone is often used for tasks such as searching for issues,
prioritising issues, assigning issues to people, and managing backlogs. Therefore,
ideally, the Summary should enable a good quick interpretation of the issue
overall. When written effectively, the Summary should touch on all important
high-level aspects of the issue and be informative for automated analysis. In
most cases, however, the Summary is not enough for a complete understanding
8
    https://jira.secondlife.com/browse/STORM-2147
                            Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques         9


          issue                        fields                    comment
      id INT                     summary STR                    id INT
      fields                     description STR                body STR
      changelog                  comments                       author
                                 issuetype                      updateAuthor
                                 project.name STR               created DATETIME
      changelog
                                 components LIST<STR>           updated DATETIME
      startAt INT
                                 labels LIST<STR>
      maxResults INT
                                 issuelinks                      issueType
      total INT
                                 subtasks                       id INT
      histories
                                 fixVersions LIST<STR>          description STR
                                 status.name STR
                                                                name STR
        history                  priority.name STR
      created DATETIME           resolution.name STR
                                 timeestimate INT                issuelink
      author
      items                      timespent INT                  id INT
                                 creator                        inwardIssue
                                                                /outwardissue
                                 reporter
          item                   assignee                       type.name STR
      field STR                  votes.votes INT
      fieldtype STR              watches.watchCount INT
      from INT                   created DATETIME                 person
      fromString STR             updated DATETIME               key STR
      to INT                     duedate DATETIME               name STR
      toString STR               resolutiondate DATETIME        active BOOL



 Fig. 2. Constructed Jira MongoDB database scheme (from Montgomery et al. [36])



of the ticket. For this reason, accurate analysis and prediction and should be
combined and corroborated with the other fields such as the Description.
    The Description field contains the full details of the issue. When stakeholders
want a detailed understanding of the issue (e.g., to be able to resolve it), they
will go to the Description. Using NLP to interpret the Description is essential
and difficult, as descriptions come in many forms, from simple small paragraphs
to multi-section deep dives. Additionally, the form of information in Descriptions
is not always natural language prose but can also include headers, code blocks,
log outputs, steps-to-reproduce, screenshots and more. In principle, all necessary
information should be listed in the Description, but in reality, some information
might be listed elsewhere in the issue, and some information might not be listed
at all. Additional information is often contained in the Comments.


Metadata and Workflow. Issue Metadata covers fields that enhance the is-
sue content and enable batch processing, retrieval, and workflow automation.
Metadata information is typically categorical data shared across the issues in a
certain project or organisation (shared labels, environments, priority levels etc.),
whereas Content information is unique. The Labels field contains tag-like infor-
mation. For instance, MCPE-318879 has multiple labels referring to Minecraft
9
    https://bugs.mojang.com/browse/MCPE-31887
10      Montgomery et al.

items. The Environment field is label-like but focuses on hardware- or software-
related information. This is often a text field, such as STL-169910 with the
Environment set to “On a MacBook Pro, using docker containers”, but it can
be more technical, such as “AWS Marketplace 1.1.4 AMI” on STL-1618.11 The
VersionsAffected field contains the software version(s) affected by the content
described in the issue. The VersionsFixed field contains the software version(s)
fixed by the content described in the issue. For example QTBUG-11745412 , its
VersionsAffected is “6.6.0 Beta4” while its VersionsFixed is “6.6.0 RC”.
    Some metadata fields can be specific to the issue workflow, supporting and
guiding issues in their lifecycle from creation to resolution. The Status field
marks the current stage of the lifecycle an issue is in. The Priority field marks
the importance of an issue in relation to other issues. The Resolution field marks
the reason for closing an issue. The CreatedDate and ResolvedDate mark the
beginning and end of an issue lifecycle. In Jira, the CreatedDate cannot change,
and any changes to the ResolvedDate are not tracked in the evolutions.
    Metadata and workflow fields contain short, possibly categorical natural lan-
guage text, but sometimes with numbers as well. These fields can either be
learned and predicted based on historic data or they might enrich and extend
the Summary and Description. For example, a script could check for duplicate
or inconsistent information in the Comments based on the current issue La-
bels. Metadata should mostly be correct and consistent, but trackers often do
not enforce validating their values. Users might be able to, for example, change
metadata without updating previous versions accordingly.

Issue Tracker Structure. The Structure fields provide structure to issue track-
ers, beyond simply annotating individual issues. The IssueType field describes
the role this issue plays within the issue tracker: epic, story, bug, feature request,
etc. (see Montgomery et al. [36] for a comprehensive breakdown of issue types).
The Project and Components fields provide a top-down structure to issue track-
ers that work roughly as mutually exclusive bins, e.g., every issue is under a
Jira, Project, and Component(s). The Parent field contains a link to the parent
issue that this issue is under. The IssueLinks field contains several links to other
internal issues, resources, and even external issues in other issue repositories.
    Many issue trackers offer the ability to link issues together via specialised
link types. These links relate issues to each other, allowing stakeholders to un-
derstand and capture the relationships between different issues, making it easier
to find information, and structuring overall project knowledge [45]. For exam-
ple, a reported issue might be part of a major bug, a bug might contribute to
a specific requirement, or two issues might refer to the same feature request.
Issue linking can be considered horizontal traceability as the links relate arte-
facts (issues) on the same level [21,16]. Issue links are listed either directly as
an attribute on the corresponding issue (e.g. in JIRA and Bugzilla) or in the
10
   https://jira.hyperledger.org/browse/STL-1699
11
   https://jira.hyperledger.org/browse/STL-1618
12
   https://bugreports.qt.io/browse/QTBUG-117454
                           Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques       11

comments sections (e.g. in GitHub Issues). There are different link types, such
as Duplicate, Relate, Block, and Subtask [30], which serve different purposes and
can be used to indicate various relationships between issues.


Discussion and Community. A significant part of issue trackers and their
data is the community of stakeholders and their involvement with the evolution
of issues. The Creator field lists the person who opened the issue. The Reporter
field contains the person who initially brought up the issue, which might be a
different person than the creator. The Assignee field lists the person responsible
for resolving the issue, which can change during the lifetime of the issue. Other
stakeholders might also register to simply Watch the issue, to be notified when
issue changes occur. These fields can be combined with profiles of individuals or
artefacts to being additional value to automated analysis.
    One significant field is the Comments field, which lists all the comments made
on an issue. For example, “that could be fun to implement, although I won’t
have time for it for a while” is a comment on QTBUG-76315.13 In this case, the
developer is conveying interest, but also their relative time constraints (which is
the likely reason for this issue still being open, despite being over 4 years old).
Another example is: “I think you are right and since three months have passed,
I can fix it for you; thank you for the issue and the suggested code changes”
on ZOOKEEPER-4703.14 In most issue trackers, the comments are displayed
in ascending chronological order after the Description. Each comment tends to
be just a few sentences long, but it can also be multiple paragraphs. Comments
might include questions, personal updates, or requests for information.
    Some comments may contain relevant information not included in the De-
scription. For example, a comment could contain the log output of the error
mentioned in the Description. A comment could also include conflicting infor-
mation relative to the Description or other fields. For example, someone could
comment that an open issue should have a status of “Closed”. Therefore, for a
stakeholder to have up-to-date precise information about an issue, they might
have to read all comments in addition to the Summary and Description. When
constructing machine representations of an issue (e.g. a vector embedding), it
may benefit the algorithm to include information listed in the comments—in
addition to the Summary and Description fields.


Evolution Data. Some issue trackers like Jira also track the history of changes
to the issue, on a per-field basis, with timestamps. In Jira, each change is stored
as a before and after of a field, including who changed it and when. This data
is described in Fig. 2 under “item”, where the “field” evolution is described
as a “fromString” and “toString”. Anything can change after the creation of
an issue, including its core data and its metadata. Some fields, e.g. Status or
Comments are more likely to change. Evolution data can be used to understand
13
     https://bugreports.qt.io/browse/QTBUG-76315
14
     https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ZOOKEEPER-4703
12        Montgomery et al.

what happened to single issues, to predict values that are likely to change, or
to understand a bigger picture in a project or organisation about what changes
might occur in what context, why, and are they rather “good or bad” changes.


3      Use Cases and Techniques for Mining Issue Trackers

We present four major use cases for leveraging data mining and NLP to sup-
port stakeholders use their issue trackers. For each use case, we introduce the
underlying motivation, data analysis algorithms applied, and general pitfalls.
We focus our discussion on Jira, while the use cases are likely relevant for any
modern issue tracker. Jira is one of the more popular issue trackers, and we have
a large public dataset available to analyse [36]. We share a JupyterNotebook on
Zenodo15 with source code for three of the use cases.16


3.1     Issue Quality Analysis

Requirements quality research aims to define, improve, and evaluate quality fac-
tors for natural language requirements. These quality factors include ambiguity,
completeness, consistency, correctness, and many more [35]. Research has pro-
duced techniques to automatically detect problems with such quality factors.
Issue trackers offer a well-suited environment to apply these techniques, as there
is a diverse and plentiful set of requirements-related knowledge to analyse.
     For this use case, we analyse User Story issues since they tend to be concise
and atomic, making them easier to analyse than other requirements forms. In
the “RedHat” Jira Repository, there is a considerable number of user stories
(∼12,000 issues with the type “Story”). Not all 12,000 are strictly user stories,
given the fluid nature of how issue trackers are used in practice. Therefore, we
filter out issues where the Description does not contain “as a” to remove issues
that are not user stories. This produces a table where each row is an issue, and
the columns are the Jira issue ID and the Description. User this data, we then
detect the following ambiguities: subjective language and nominalisations. We
do this by applying different NLP techniques, including lexical lookups, regu-
lar expressions, part-of-speech tagging, parse trees, and hypernyms. Generative
Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) and Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown
increasing promise as powerful tools for NLP applications. These algorithms can
likely be applied for language translation, grammar and spell checking, text clas-
sification, summarisation of long texts, and even full Description generation. For
this use case involving specific types of ambiguity, however, we will be focusing
on traditional NLP techniques designed to target specific structural aspects of
language.
15
     https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10779206
16
     The fourth use case already has a replication available at
     https://github.com/RegenKordel/LYNX-BeyondDuplicates
                            Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques       13

Subjective Language. There are multiple types of subjective language that
are considered ambiguous. Tjong et al. [48] and Gleich et al. [14] suggest algo-
rithms to detect various types of ambiguous subjective language.
    Tjong et al. addressed “dangerous plurals” and “inside behaviour” [48]. Dan-
gerous plurals are subjective due to the lack of clarity regarding boundary condi-
tions on words such as “few”, “little”, and “many”. Here is an example from our
dataset: “of course there’s no need to provide every single detail of the proposed
architecture in the design document”, where the use of “every” here is ambigu-
ous, and left to stakeholders to interpret. Inside behaviour is subjective due to
the lack of specificity regarding the outside behaviour of functional elements,
such as with the use of words like “until”, “during”, and “after”. Here is an
example from our dataset: “specific releases experience reliability issues during
regular Motions”, where “during” here lacks a description of when these relia-
bility issues start and stop. Both types of subjective language can be detected
using lexical lookups (searching for individual words).
    Gleich et al. addressed “unclear inclusion” and “passive voice” [14]. Unclear
inclusions are ambiguous due to the use of “up to” without the use of “including”
or “excluding”. It is then unclear whether the described values are to be included
or not in the definition of that functionality. Here is an example from our dataset:
“the engine returns up to 10 fired events”, where it is unclear if the engine can
return 10 events. We can identify this ambiguity using the following regular
expression:
    up\\sto\\s(?!.*including|excluding)

    Gleich et al. [14] constructed a technique to detect “passive voice” with the
use of part-of-speech (POS) tagging and regular expressions. Passive voice leads
to ambiguity where the actor of a verb is omitted, e.g., “the gate was opened”
(but we do not know who opened the gate). To detect such an ambiguity, we need
POS tags. POS tagging is the process of assigning a word a tag that represents its
role within the sentence, e.g., noun, verb, adjective, etc. These tags are assigned
based on the word itself and its context within the sentence. Using POS tags
allows us to search for more than just the literal words. It allows us to search
for classes of words and also words being used in specific ways (e.g., “brush”
can be both a noun and a verb). To detect passive voice, Gleich et al. [14] apply
POS tagging to the requirement, searching for the verb “to be”, followed by the
past participle verb form (most often verbs ending with “ed”), and no additional
verbs between the two preceding parts. You can see this three-part approach in
the regular expression below (each part separated by a space).
    \\b\\w+?°V[^°]*°be (\\W[^°]+?°(?!VB.)[^°]*°[^ ]+?)* \\W\\w+?°VBN°\\w+


Nominalisations. Nominalisation is the transformation of a verb phrase into a
noun phrase, which reduces a complex process into a single noun word or phrase.
An alternative definition is given by Lapata where nominalisations are seen as
“a particular class of compound nouns whose head noun is derived from a verb
and whose modifier is interpreted as an argument of this verb” [27]. Ambiguity
can arise from nominalising a complex process since a different meaning (or
14     Montgomery et al.

meaning containing less information) is communicated [15]. According to Goetz
and Rupp [15], nominalisations can manifest in requirements from distortions—
i.e., the constant re-organisation of previously acquired knowledge. For example,
“Powering down the cab radio ...” can be ambiguous because the complexity of
“Powering” is hidden behind a noun and not adequately described.
     To detect nominalisations, Bouraffa uses simple NLP methods, without the
need of ad-hoc lookup tables [7]. They distinguish between two types of nominal-
isations: derived nominals and gerundive nominals. Derived nominals originate
from adverbs, adjectives, and verbs that are simplifying a complex process using
additional derived components, such as “-tion” or “-ism.” Gerundive nominals
are verbs in the “-ing” form that are not being used as proper verbs in a sentence.
An example of a derived nominal and a gerundive nominal, is “Powering down
the cab radio shall cause the disconnection from the mobile network”. “Power-
ing” is the gerundive nominal and “disconnection” is the derived nominal. Both
cases present complex processes that are simplified to single words.
     Bouraffa identifies derived nominals using POS tags, special suffixes, and hy-
pernyms [7]. A word suffix is a set of characters appended to the end of a word
stem, such as “-tion”, “-ism”, or “-ty”. Hypernyms organize words in an is-a
relationship, creating a tree hierarchy that relates words to each other. First,
we retrieve nouns (i.e., POS tag “NN” and “NNS”). Then, we look for specific
suffixes signalling a derived nominal. Finally, since we are interested in the nom-
inalisation of actions, we only retain words having “EVENT”, “PROCESS”, or
“ACT” in their hypernym path. These hypernyms indicate a noun that usually
acts as a verb; hence, they have been nominalised. Here is an example from our
dataset: “During default deployments (without user-specific configuration) TLS
termination is managed by the Route”. “Default deployments” is a nominalisa-
tion that hides a complex process and therefore introduces ambiguity, which is
likely why the user had to add a qualifier in braces right after it.
     Bouraffa identifies gerundive nominals using POS tags and dependency trees [7].
Dependency trees describe how words in a sentence are related to each other,
for example, “root”, “compound”, and “direct object.” Using POS tags, we first
retrieve terms tagged as “VBG” (i.e., a gerundive verb) and then check whether
it is a gerundive nominal (nominalisation). To this end, we parse the dependency
tree and check if the VBG term is not labelled as root verb of a sentence, auxil-
iary of a verb, adverbial modifier, compound, or clausal modifier of a noun. These
labels signify situations in which the gerundive verb is being used as an actual
verb, and therefore is not a nominalisation. Here is an example from our dataset:
“Specific information about the persistence implementation should not be in the
CR attributes”. The nominalisation is in “persistence implementation”, which
is a complex process that has reduced to a two-noun phrase, thereby hiding the
details and creating ambiguity.


Pitfalls and Takeaways. Issue trackers provide access to plenty of require-
ments data created by stakeholders with different backgrounds and expertises.
Before applying a mining or a machine learning technique to the core textual
                           Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques       15

information, a manual checking and advanced preprocessing might be needed.
Issues labelled “User Story”, for example, might not strictly follow User Story
templates, and might contain surrounding context such as acceptance criteria.
    Applying NLP techniques is then a matter of extracting the natural language
text with the desired algorithms. Some algorithms, such as Subjective Language
algorithms, can produce false positives (requirements that are labelled as ambi-
guities but are actually not). This is partly due to the nature of some algorithms
using simple heuristics, partly due to the nature of ambiguity itself, and partly
due to the heterogeneous data. Research into ambiguity is still ongoing and even
defining what is ambiguous, in which contexts, to whom, is not trivial.

3.2   Evolution Analysis
Evolution data is powerful as it facilitates viewing the data at any point in time
and understanding what has changed (and possibly why). This can be used as a
tool for predictive modelling and grounded investigations, among other things.
Research into requirements evolution is limited mainly to change management,
which is more about processes than data. The concept of using requirements
histories is not entirely novel, but it is rather understudied.
    Requirements evolution data is quite rare since pre-finalised requirements
are either not public, or non-systematically versioned. Additionally, even when
requirements do have evolution data, it is often in the form of requirements doc-
uments with multiple versions over time. This can be challenging to unpack and
utilise in research since tracing between requirements is frequently lost, and it
is not trivial to write automatic extraction scripts. Thus, issue trackers offer a
unique source of requirements evolution data since issues and their evolutions
are well-structured. Additionally, issues are designed to be atomic units of infor-
mation, so individual requirements tend to be in individual issues.
    Analysing the evolution depends on the particular evolving field being anal-
ysed. In particular, the evolution of issue metadata, issue structure, and issue
content might require different techniques and might lead to different insights.
Concerning metadata and structure, there is a large body of work from the last
decade. The overall approach is usually the same: predict the value of a certain
issue field based on learning from past data. For instance, we could train a ma-
chine learning classifier on past issue data to predict which priority an issue is
likely to have, who should be the assignee [46], or what link to other issue is
should have [31]. Most of these works use the last snapshot of previous issues to
predict the field of a new issue (or just randomly split issues into training and
testing sets without considering the time). The evolutions of the issues in the
training set are typically ignored. This might, however, bear useful information
about false positive predictions or of what fields are likely to change.
    Applying evolution analysis on core textual data of the issues might lead to
insight about when an issue (or a requirement) changes and why. One such a
reason could be that the text was ambiguous in the original text, contextual
information was missing, or the language is “too emotional”. Sentiment analysis
rates the affective nature of the text as either positive, negative, or neutral. In
16       Montgomery et al.

other words, is the writer of the text conveying positive, negative, or neutral
emotion through their words. Certain sentiment analysis tools extract more in-
formation than that, including specific emotions such as happiness, sadness, or
anger. However, these tools often require more input data for a confident predic-
tion and the results are often less accurate than sentiment polarity alone. One
objective is to investigate sentiment across evolutions and uncover the dynamics
of issue descriptions through time. In particular, we are interested to see if ed-
its make descriptions rather neutral in sentiment. Issue descriptions should be
strictly informational, so perhaps over time the sentiment trends to zero.
    Any requirement type from any Jira repository can fit to this analysis. We
thus sample issues from all available repositories. We first gather 10,000 issues per
repository, randomly, and then perform several cleaning steps to remove defects
such as missing and impossible data (e.g., closed date before open date). There
are then 64,840 issues left, with most Jira repos containing ∼5–7k issues, and
some smaller repos such as SecondLife and Sonatype contributing ∼500 issues.
We first want to consider how many evolutions each issue has. At a minimum,
each issue should have at least one evolution where the description changes.
Finally, we filter the data down to just the Description field, since we are only
analysing that text. Our final dataset is a table with 35k rows, where each row
is an evolution to an issue’s Description field.
    Now that we have a table with a row for every evolution to Descriptions,
we extract the sentiment score and track that over time as an issue evolves.
For simplicity, we compare the sentiment of the first version of the description
to the last version. We extract the sentiment score using SpaCy spacytextblob
package.17 Finally, we calculate the description sentiment “trend” and store that
alongside the descriptions themselves, to allow for manual analysis.
    Here are two examples of issue descriptions at the start and end, and the
sentiment trend between them. The description at creation was: “Chef has been
identified as a suitable option to create the automatic deployment mechanism.
The architecture of the mechanism needs to be specified, and then implement
in Chef”. The final description simply had “suitable” removed, leading to a 0.55
drop in sentiment, which means the sentiment became more negative. This makes
sense, since “suitable” is a positive word, and removing it made the description
more technical and without pleasantry. Another issue description started as:
“The Wss4jSecurityInterceptor has no X509 Binary security token support yet. It
would be great if we could add it.” The description at the end was “Document the
X509 Binary security token support for Wss4j.”, which resulted in a sentiment
drop of 0.8. This appears, again, to be a matter of removing positive words such
as “great” in favour of a more literal and to-the-point description.

Pitfalls and Takeaways. Issue trackers offer a specifically powerful perspec-
tive on requirements with their full evolutionary history. We have showcased one
such analysis of this data, but there are many more opportunities. For sentiment
analysis, it appears that the sentiment model is very sensitive to non-textual
17
     https://spacy.io/universe/project/spacy-textblob
                            Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques       17

elements, such as URLs. For this reason, it is important to filter the data appro-
priately and do many manual checks of the results before coming to conclusions.
Additionally, issue trackers have many unexplainable data points that can break
even robust analysis tools. This data includes strings that are too long, likely
due to log dumps or copy-paste content from software output.

3.3   Discussion Analysis
Requirements engineering is a collaborative process involving multiple stakehold-
ers who interact to clarify, prioritize, and implement requirements. Issue trackers
offer a central place for analysing and assisting this collaboration [5]. It is com-
mon that each issue has a running list of comments just below the description.
Even in more restrictive issue trackers where only certain people can create or
edit issues, the ability to comment is often left open to the public.
    There are various objectives for such analysis. First, discussion analysis can
monitor the overall activity intensity, as some issues tend to receive more com-
ments than others. Here similar sentiment analysis can be applied as to the issue
description evolution, e.g. to detect and possibly steer escalations. Second, com-
ments might include different types of information which can be useful for dif-
ferent tasks and different stakeholders, such as steps to reproduce, workarounds,
background knowledge and rationale why a certain feature is needed etc. Dis-
cussion analysis can aim at classifying or retrieving such specific information to
support an easier access to the information [2]. Third, information in the com-
ments that should be propagated to the issue fields can be extracted, and the
fields updated. For example, situations where someone has commented that the
status should be updated, but it has yet to be. To demonstrate such analysis, we
use the same dataset that we generated for the last use case: a sample of issues
from all Jira repositories in the dataset. However, we do not filter the issues or
evolutions on a particular condition.
    Our objective is to find cases where the comments or description mention
attributes that should be changed in their respective fields. This task is quite
difficult with high precision, so we aim for high recall and do some fast manual
analysis to find what we are really looking for. The first step towards our ob-
jective is to gather a list of all field names to search for in the comments and
descriptions. This is trivial: we gather a unique set of all “field” names from our
table leading to 26 unique fields. We can already search for these field names in
comments and descriptions, which are likely candidates for related discussions.
However, to further reduce the dataset and increase precision (while maintain-
ing high recall) we require that the comment or description mentions one of the
values for this field (we call these states). For example, “I think the status is
wrong” would not be enough, it would have to say something like “I think the
status should be set to closed ”. To find all possible states for a given field, we
gather a unique set of all values that field has ever been set to. To keep the lists
manageable and realistic, we limit each list to all states that field has ever been,
in the Jira it is in. The result is a multi-level dictionary item where for a given
Jira and field, all states are listed.
18     Montgomery et al.

    We then mine all comments and description evolutions, searching for cases
where both a field name has been mentioned, and at least one of the field states
that it could be in. Our analysis finds many results; however, as previously
mentioned, we now need to manually filter through them to identify situations
where there is really an explicit suggestion for a field to have a different value.
Here is an example of a false positive: “Sorry, this is not a Major Priority,
so I cannot demote”. They happen to use the words Priority (field name) and
Major (possible field state), but they are not recommending that the priority
field be changed to major. There are also many close but still false positives
where a comment retroactively comments that a field has been changed, e.g.,
“Changed Priority to Major”. One example of a true positive is: “I do not know
why the Priority is changed to P2-High”, which is discussion point where the
author thinks the priority should be changed to something else. Here is a true
positive we aimed at identifying: “We need to fix this issue ASAP. [...] Please
mark this issue as High Priority”. Here is another true positive: “That’s not a
Low Priority ticket because our workflow is completely blocked right now”. With
such a simple lookup, we can filter down the set to a reasonably sized set with
pre-conditions we assume are necessary to find the right data.


Pitfalls and Takeaways. Analysing issue discussions does not require ad-
vanced NLP techniques. Already, word matching to find terms reflecting issue
statuses, priorities, or related issues can lead to identifying relevant comments
with a satisfying precision. Certainly, more advance information retrieval tech-
niques, text classification, and semantic reasoning could improve the output.


3.4   Link and Structure Analysis

Link analysis serves as an approach for gaining insights into the relationships
between two issues. When applied recursively, more coarse-grained structure
analysis can be achieved, e.g. to identify issue sub-graphs in a project denoting
workflow, organisational or architectural dependency [30].
    Issue trackers enable users to connect the various pieces of information they
store in issues. Therefore, issue trackers are good sources for conducting link
analysis due to their comprehensive tracking of both issues and the links be-
tween them. One of the most prominent research problems is duplicate detec-
tion [9,1,20,50], which involves determining whether two issues essentially de-
scribe the same problem or feature. This task can be approached using NLP
techniques that assess textual or semantic similarity between issues, analyse dif-
ferences in text length, or consider the combined length of text. However, beyond
duplicate detection, issue trackers encompass various link types providing an ex-
tensive landscape for exploration. This type of analysis is particularly beneficial
for users navigating large issue trackers with substantial backlogs, as it aids in
the discovery of relevant issues amid the vast array of available data.
    One primary objective in conducting this analysis is to gain insights into the
similarities and distinctions among linked texts based on their types. For the
                                                     Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques                                 19

purposes of the demonstration, we focus on issues that are created within the year
of 2021 and that have established links to other issues. Furthermore, we focus on
repositories with include prevalent links and multiple link types. The first step
for issue link analysis is to represent the issues as vectors which can compared in
a particular space: a technique that is called embedding. Embeddings take words
or sentences and try to embed them into a vector space. Words or sentences with
similar meanings should be close to each other and words or sentences with very
dissimilar meanings should be far away from each other. The textual similarity
between pairs of linked issue texts can be measured using the cosine similarity:
that is the angle between two vectors divided by the product of their lengths.
This results in a similarity score from [−1, 1].
    We can employ two embedding techniques: TF-IDF and BERT. We embed
the text content, encompassing both the issue titles and their respective descrip-
tions. We can compare the cosine similarity scores derived from the TF-IDF
embeddings with those produced by the BERT embeddings, with a specific fo-
cus on various link types identified within the Hyperledger repository. Figure 3
shows the distribution of the cosine similarities per link type.


                                                    Cosine Similarity of Embeddings per Link Type
                    1.0                                                                                 texttype
                                                                                              tfidf_cosine_similarity_whole_issue
                    0.8                                                                       sentence_embedding_whole_issue
Cosine Similarity




                    0.6

                    0.4

                    0.2

                    0.0
                          Epic-Relation   Relates   Subtask      Blocks      Cloners     Issue split   Duplicate Git Code Review
                                                                      Linktype


Fig. 3. Link analysis with TF-IDF and BERT embeddings and their cosine similarity
of issue texts of linked issues per link type.


   In our analysis, we have made several observations. First, we noticed a consis-
tent trend: the cosine similarity of TF-IDF embeddings tends to be consistently
lower than that of BERT embeddings. This can be attributed to the inherent
limitations of TF-IDF in capturing nuanced semantic meanings and synonyms
when compared to BERT. BERT, being a contextual language model, excels in
comprehending contextual and semantic information within text. Consequently,
BERT embeddings often yield higher cosine similarity scores, indicating a more
thorough grasp of the underlying semantics of the text.
   Second, within our dataset, we identified a distinct category known as the
Cloners. These issues exhibit the highest similarity, regardless of whether TF-
IDF or BERT embeddings are used. This elevated similarity is largely attributed
20      Montgomery et al.

to the nature of Cloners. These issues are typically created with Jira’s clone fea-
ture, allowing users to generate new issues based on existing ones while retain-
ing the flexibility to modify specific attributes. Consequently, Cloners inherit a
substantial portion of content from the original issue, particularly in terms of
TF-IDF vectorisation, which contributes to their high TF-IDF similarity.
    Third, beyond the Cloners, we found that other link types display relatively
similar cosine similarity scores, regardless of the embedding technique employed.
For TF-IDF, the scores range from 0.12 to 0.25, while for BERT, they span from
0.36 to 0.60. Interestingly, the Duplicate link type does not significantly differ
in its cosine similarity compared to other link types. This observation raises
questions about the effectiveness of models solely relying on text similarity in
distinguishing Duplicate links from other types, as noted by Lüders et al. [30].
    General typed link detection remains an active research area. Previous stud-
ies, such as those by Lüders et al. [31] (macro F1-scores ranging from 0.41 to 0.88
and weighted F1-scores of 0.64 to 0.95) and Nicholson et al. [37,38] (weighted
F1-scores from 0.56 to 0.70) showcasing the ongoing challenges. Lüders et al. [31]
used the same Jira dataset. Their replication package can be used to demonstrate
link classification. Borg et al. [6] categorised explicit links in two issue-tracking
systems into four categories: “Related”, “Duplicate”, “Clone”, and “Miscella-
neous”, highlighting that “Clone” links represent a stronger form of “Duplicate”
links due to their issues sharing identical textual content. Li et al. [29] delved
into issue linking practices on GitHub, categorising link types into six categories,
including “Dependent”, “Duplicate”, “Relevant”, “Referenced”, “Fixed”, and
“Enhanced”. Their findings emphasised the need for automated classification,
where “Referenced” links often referred to historical comments with essential
knowledge, and “Duplicate” links were frequently marked within the same day.
Finally, Tomova et al. [49] investigated seven open-source systems, revealing that
the rationale behind selecting a specific link type is not always obvious. Addition-
ally, they noted that Clone links are indicative of textual similarity, while issues
connected through a Relate link exhibit varying degrees of textual similarity,
often necessitating additional contextual information for accurate identification.


4    Discussion and Summary

Issue trackers have emerged as a new key place where requirements knowledge
is crafted, delivered, and maintained—along with bugs, tasks and other system
and project knowledge. What makes issue repository even more interesting is
that issues usually are connected to source code repository and other resources.
Therefore, mining issue trackers as a rich and integrated knowledge base for
software repositories bears a large potential to assist various stakeholders in-
cluding analysis, product owners, developers, and users. Capturing, managing
and sharing requirements knowledge has been an ongoing challenge and area of
research for decades [33]. With issue trackers, requirements knowledge is directly
connected in complex linked graphs, traceable directly to code, and explained
through rationale links back to feature requests. The capability of these systems
                             Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques           21

is not just contained to what can be extracted from them, issue trackers are also
a rich platform for embedded recommender systems [22] in the form of browser
extensions and tool plugins.
    Issue trackers continue to fill up with information over time, which inevitably
causes information overload and makes navigating these systems challenging.
Managing and extracting insights from the vast amount of heterogeneous data
can be overwhelming. Moreover, the quality of textual information within issue
trackers often varies widely. Inconsistent information, low-quality text, and too
large “knowledge graphs” can hinder the effectiveness of mining efforts and using
the data. We demonstrated how properly leveraging NLP techniques, even as
simple as term look-ups, can help unpacking, utilising, and even correcting the
information stored in issue trackers.
    NLP can help in addressing many RE-related use cases, but the essential
component of this lies in the linked meta-data. Traditional NLP and modern
machine learning techniques, such embeddings, semantic similarity, and language
generation offer effective methods to analyse, extract, and correct information
from textual data in issue trackers. Alongside the textual data, issue trackers
offer a rich set of meta-data that can enhance solutions beyond just the insights
available in the text. Holistic approaches combining NLP with the meta-data
can offer much more value in approaching more complex problems.

References
 1. Anvik, J., Hiew, L., Murphy, G.C.: Coping with an open bug repository. In:
    Storey, M.D., Burke, M.G., Cheng, L., van der Hoek, A. (eds.) Proceedings
    of the 2005 OOPSLA workshop on Eclipse Technology eXchange, ETX 2005,
    San Diego, California, USA, October 16-17, 2005. pp. 35–39. ACM (2005).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/1117696.1117704
 2. Arya, D.M., Wang, W., Guo, J.L.C., Cheng, J.: Analysis and detection of infor-
    mation types of open source software issue discussions. In: Atlee, J.M., Bultan, T.,
    Whittle, J. (eds.) Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software
    Engineering, ICSE 2019, Montreal, QC, Canada, May 25-31, 2019. pp. 454–464.
    IEEE / ACM (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00058
 3. Baysal, O.: Informing development decisions: from data to information. In: Notkin,
    D., Cheng, B.H.C., Pohl, K. (eds.) 35th International Conference on Software En-
    gineering, ICSE ’13, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 18-26, 2013. pp. 1407–1410.
    IEEE Computer Society (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2013.6606729
 4. Baysal, O., Holmes, R., Godfrey, M.W.: No issue left behind: reducing information
    overload in issue tracking. In: Cheung, S., Orso, A., Storey, M.D. (eds.) Proceedings
    of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
    Engineering, (FSE-22), Hong Kong, China, November 16 - 22, 2014. pp. 666–677.
    ACM (2014). https://doi.org/10.1145/2635868.2635887
 5. Bertram, D., Voida, A., Greenberg, S., Walker, R.J.: Communication, collab-
    oration, and bugs: the social nature of issue tracking in small, collocated
    teams. In: Inkpen, K., Gutwin, C., Tang, J.C. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2010
    ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW 2010,
    Savannah, Georgia, USA, February 6-10, 2010. pp. 291–300. ACM (2010).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/1718918.1718972
22      Montgomery et al.

 6. Borg, M., Pfahl, D., Runeson, P.: Analyzing networks of issue reports. In: Cleve, A.,
    Ricca, F., Cerioli, M. (eds.) 17th European Conference on Software Maintenance
    and Reengineering, CSMR 2013, Genova, Italy, March 5-8, 2013. pp. 79–88. IEEE
    Computer Society (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/CSMR.2013.18
 7. Bouraffa, A.: Improving The Quality of Requirement Specifications Using Auto-
    matic Ambiguity Detection Tools. Msc thesis, TU Hamburg (April 2019), https:
    //www.sts.tuhh.de/pw-and-m-theses/2019/bouraffa19.pdf
 8. Cavalcanti, Y.C., da Mota Silveira Neto, P.A., do Carmo Machado, I., Vale, T.F.,
    de Almeida, E.S., de Lemos Meira, S.R.: Challenges and opportunities for software
    change request repositories: a systematic mapping study. J. Softw. Evol. Process.
    26(7), 620–653 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/SMR.1639
 9. Deshmukh, J., Annervaz, K.M., Podder, S., Sengupta, S., Dubash, N.: Towards
    accurate duplicate bug retrieval using deep learning techniques. In: 2017 IEEE
    International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution, ICSME 2017,
    Shanghai, China, September 17-22, 2017. pp. 115–124. IEEE Computer Society
    (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSME.2017.69
10. Diamantopoulos, T., Nastos, D., Symeonidis, A.L.: Semantically-enriched jira issue
    tracking data. In: 20th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Mining Software
    Repositories, MSR 2023, Melbourne, Australia, May 15-16, 2023. pp. 218–222.
    IEEE (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR59073.2023.00039
11. Ernst, N.A., Murphy, G.C.: Case studies in just-in-time requirements analysis.
    In: Second IEEE International Workshop on Empirical Requirements Engineering,
    EmpiRE 2012, Chicago, IL, USA, September 25, 2012. pp. 25–32. IEEE Computer
    Society (2012). https://doi.org/10.1109/EMPIRE.2012.6347678
12. Ferrari, A., Esuli, A.: An NLP approach for cross-domain ambiguity detec-
    tion in requirements engineering. Autom. Softw. Eng. 26(3), 559–598 (2019).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/S10515-019-00261-7
13. Fucci, D., Palomares, C., Franch, X., Costal, D., Raatikainen, M., Stettinger,
    M., Kurtanovic, Z., Kojo, T., Koenig, L., Falkner, A.A., Schenner, G., Brasca,
    F., Männistö, T., Felfernig, A., Maalej, W.: Needs and challenges for a platform
    to support large-scale requirements engineering: a multiple-case study. In: Oivo,
    M., Fernández, D.M., Mockus, A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 12th ACM/IEEE
    International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement,
    ESEM 2018, Oulu, Finland, October 11-12, 2018. pp. 19:1–19:10. ACM (2018).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3239235.3240498
14. Gleich, B., Creighton, O., Kof, L.: Ambiguity detection: Towards a tool ex-
    plaining ambiguity sources. In: Wieringa, R.J., Persson, A. (eds.) Requirements
    Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality, 16th International Working Con-
    ference, REFSQ 2010, Essen, Germany, June 30 - July 2, 2010. Proceedings.
    Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6182, pp. 218–232. Springer (2010).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-14192-8 20
15. Goetz, R., Rupp, C.: Psychotherapy for system requirements. In: Patel, D., Patel,
    S., Wang, Y. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Conference on
    Cognitive Informatics (ICCI 2003), 18-20 August 2003, London, UK. pp. 75–80.
    IEEE Computer Society (2003). https://doi.org/10.1109/COGINF.2003.1225956
16. Gotel, O., Cleland-Huang, J., Hayes, J.H., Zisman, A., Egyed, A., Grünbacher, P.,
    Dekhtyar, A., Antoniol, G., Maletic, J.I., Mäder, P.: Traceability fundamentals. In:
    Cleland-Huang, J., Gotel, O., Zisman, A. (eds.) Software and Systems Traceability,
    pp. 3–22. Springer (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-2239-5 1
                              Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques           23

17. Gousios, G.: The ghtorent dataset and tool suite. In: Zimmermann, T., Penta,
    M.D., Kim, S. (eds.) Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Soft-
    ware Repositories, MSR ’13, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 18-19, 2013. pp. 233–
    236. IEEE Computer Society (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2013.6624034
18. Groen, E.C., Seyff, N., Ali, R., Dalpiaz, F., Dörr, J., Guzman, E., Hosseini,
    M., Marco, J., Oriol, M., Perini, A., Stade, M.J.C.: The crowd in requirements
    engineering: The landscape and challenges. IEEE Softw. 34(2), 44–52 (2017).
    https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2017.33
19. Haering, M., Stanik, C., Maalej, W.: Automatically matching bug reports with re-
    lated app reviews. In: 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software En-
    gineering, ICSE 2021, Madrid, Spain, 22-30 May 2021. pp. 970–981. IEEE (2021).
    https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00092
20. He, J., Xu, L., Yan, M., Xia, X., Lei, Y.: Duplicate bug report detection using dual-
    channel convolutional neural networks. In: ICPC ’20: 28th International Conference
    on Program Comprehension, Seoul, Republic of Korea, July 13-15, 2020. pp. 117–
    127. ACM (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3387904.3389263
21. Heck, P., Zaidman, A.: Horizontal traceability for just-in-time requirements: the
    case for open source feature requests. J. Softw. Evol. Process. 26(12), 1280–1296
    (2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/SMR.1678
22. Herzig, K., Zeller, A.: Mining bug data - A practitioner’s guide. In: Robillard, M.P.,
    Maalej, W., Walker, R.J., Zimmermann, T. (eds.) Recommendation Systems in
    Software Engineering, pp. 131–171. Springer (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
    3-642-45135-5 6
23. Ho, J., Tang, R.: Towards an optimal resolution to information overload: an in-
    fomediary approach. In: Proceedings of GROUP 2001, ACM 2001 International
    Conference on Supporting Group Work, September 30 - October 3, 2001, Boulder,
    Colorado, USA. pp. 91–96. ACM (2001). https://doi.org/10.1145/500286.500302
24. Kallis, R., Chaparro, O., Sorbo, A.D., Panichella, S.: Nlbse’22 tool competition.
    In: Sorbo, A.D., Panichella, S. (eds.) 2022 IEEE/ACM 1st International Workshop
    on Natural Language-Based Software Engineering (NLBSE 2022), Co-located with
    ICSE 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May 8, 2022. pp. 25–28. ACM/IEEE (2022).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3528588.3528664
25. Karre, S.A., Shukla, A., Reddy, Y.R.: Does your bug tracking tool suit your needs?
    A study on open source bug tracking tools. CoRR abs/1706.06799 (2017), http:
    //arxiv.org/abs/1706.06799
26. Lamkanfi, A., Pérez, J., Demeyer, S.: The eclipse and mozilla defect tracking
    dataset: a genuine dataset for mining bug information. In: Zimmermann, T., Penta,
    M.D., Kim, S. (eds.) Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Soft-
    ware Repositories, MSR ’13, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 18-19, 2013. pp. 203–
    206. IEEE Computer Society (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2013.6624028
27. Lapata, M.: The disambiguation of nominalizations. Comput. Linguistics 28(3),
    357–388 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1162/089120102760276018
28. Lazar, A., Ritchey, S., Sharif, B.: Generating duplicate bug datasets. In: Devanbu,
    P.T., Kim, S., Pinzger, M. (eds.) 11th Working Conference on Mining Software
    Repositories, MSR 2014, Proceedings, May 31 - June 1, 2014, Hyderabad, India.
    pp. 392–395. ACM (2014). https://doi.org/10.1145/2597073.2597128
29. Li, L., Ren, Z., Li, X., Zou, W., Jiang, H.: How are issue units linked? empirical
    study on the linking behavior in github. In: 25th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering
    Conference, APSEC 2018, Nara, Japan, December 4-7, 2018. pp. 386–395. IEEE
    (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/APSEC.2018.00053
24      Montgomery et al.

30. Lüders, C.M., Bouraffa, A., Maalej, W.: Beyond duplicates: Towards un-
    derstanding and predicting link types in issue tracking systems. In: 19th
    IEEE/ACM International Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR
    2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May 23-24, 2022. pp. 48–60. ACM (2022).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528457
31. Lüders, C.M., Pietz, T., Maalej, W.: On understanding and predicting issue links.
    Requir. Eng. 28(4), 541–565 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/S00766-023-00406-X
32. Maalej, W.: Task-first or context-first? tool integration revisited. In: ASE 2009,
    24th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering,
    Auckland, New Zealand, November 16-20, 2009. pp. 344–355. IEEE Computer
    Society (2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE.2009.36
33. Maalej, W., Thurimella, A.K. (eds.): Managing Requirements Knowledge. Springer
    (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-34419-0
34. Mockus, A., Fielding, R.T., Herbsleb, J.D.: Two case studies of open source soft-
    ware development: Apache and mozilla. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 11(3),
    309–346 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1145/567793.567795
35. Montgomery, L., Fucci, D., Bouraffa, A., Scholz, L., Maalej, W.: Empirical research
    on requirements quality: a systematic mapping study. Requir. Eng. 27(2), 183–209
    (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/S00766-021-00367-Z
36. Montgomery, L., Lüders, C.M., Maalej, W.: An alternative issue tracking dataset of
    public jira repositories. In: 19th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Mining
    Software Repositories, MSR 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May 23-24, 2022. pp.
    73–77. ACM (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528486
37. Nicholson, A., Arya, D.M., Guo, J.L.C.: Traceability network analysis: A
    case study of links in issue tracking systems. In: 7th IEEE International
    Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Requirements Engineering, AIRE@RE
    2020, Zurich, Switzerland, September 1, 2020. pp. 39–47. IEEE (2020).
    https://doi.org/10.1109/AIRE51212.2020.00013
38. Nicholson, A., Guo, J.L.C.: Issue link label recovery and prediction for
    open source software. In: Yue, T., Mirakhorli, M. (eds.) 29th IEEE Interna-
    tional Requirements Engineering Conference Workshops, RE 2021 Workshops,
    Notre Dame, IN, USA, September 20-24, 2021. pp. 126–135. IEEE (2021).
    https://doi.org/10.1109/REW53955.2021.00024
39. Nikeghbal, N., Kargaran, A.H., Heydarnoori, A., Schütze, H.: Girt-data: Sampling
    github issue report templates. In: 20th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
    Mining Software Repositories, MSR 2023, Melbourne, Australia, May 15-16, 2023.
    pp. 104–108. IEEE (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR59073.2023.00026
40. Ortu, M., Destefanis, G., Adams, B., Murgia, A., Marchesi, M., Tonelli, R.: The
    JIRA repository dataset: Understanding social aspects of software development.
    In: Bener, A., Minku, L.L., Turhan, B. (eds.) Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
    tional Conference on Predictive Models and Data Analytics in Software Engineer-
    ing, PROMISE 2015, Beijing, China, October 21, 2015. pp. 1:1–1:4. ACM (2015).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/2810146.2810147
41. Raatikainen, M., Motger, Q., Lüders, C.M., Franch, X., Myllyaho, L., Kettunen, E.,
    Marco, J., Tiihonen, J., Halonen, M., Männistö, T.: Improved management of issue
    dependencies in issue trackers of large collaborative projects. IEEE Trans. Software
    Eng. 49(4), 2128–2148 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2022.3212166
42. Rahim, M.S., Chowdhury, A.E., Nandi, D., Rahman, M.: Issue starvation in soft-
    ware development: A case study on the redmine issue tracking system dataset.
    Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering (JTEC) 9(3-
    3), 185–189 (2017)
                             Mining Issue Trackers: Concepts and Techniques          25

43. Regnell, B., Berntsson-Svensson, R., Wnuk, K.: Can we beat the complexity of very
    large-scale requirements engineering? In: Paech, B., Rolland, C. (eds.) Require-
    ments Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality, 14th International Work-
    ing Conference, REFSQ 2008, Montpellier, France, June 16-17, 2008, Proceed-
    ings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5025, pp. 123–128. Springer (2008).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-69062-7 11
44. Reinartz, W., Krafft, M., Hoyer, W.D.: The customer relationship management
    process: Its measurement and impact on performance. Journal of marketing re-
    search 41(3), 293–305 (2004)
45. Sandusky, R.J., Gasser, L., Ripoche, G.: Bug report networks: Varieties, strategies,
    and impacts in a F/OSS development community. In: Hassan, A.E., Holt, R.C.,
    Mockus, A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Mining Soft-
    ware Repositories, MSR@ICSE 2004, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 25th May 2004.
    pp. 80–84 (2004)
46. Stanik, C., Montgomery, L., Martens, D., Fucci, D., Maalej, W.: A simple nlp-
    based approach to support onboarding and retention in open source communities.
    In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution,
    ICSME 2018, Madrid, Spain, September 23-29, 2018. pp. 172–182. IEEE Computer
    Society (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSME.2018.00027
47. Tawosi, V., Al-Subaihin, A.A., Moussa, R., Sarro, F.: A versatile dataset of agile
    open source software projects. In: 19th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
    Mining Software Repositories, MSR 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, May 23-24, 2022.
    pp. 707–711. ACM (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528029
48. Tjong, S.F., Berry, D.M.: The design of SREE - A prototype potential ambiguity
    finder for requirements specifications and lessons learned. In: Dörr, J., Opdahl,
    A.L. (eds.) Requirements Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality - 19th In-
    ternational Working Conference, REFSQ 2013, Essen, Germany, April 8-11, 2013.
    Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7830, pp. 80–95. Springer
    (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-37422-7 6
49. Tomova, M.T., Rath, M., Mäder, P.: Use of trace link types in issue tracking sys-
    tems. In: Chaudron, M., Crnkovic, I., Chechik, M., Harman, M. (eds.) Proceedings
    of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Pro-
    ceeedings, ICSE 2018, Gothenburg, Sweden, May 27 - June 03, 2018. pp. 181–182.
    ACM (2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/3183440.3195086
50. Wang, X., Zhang, L., Xie, T., Anvik, J., Sun, J.: An approach to detecting du-
    plicate bug reports using natural language and execution information. In: Schäfer,
    W., Dwyer, M.B., Gruhn, V. (eds.) 30th International Conference on Software En-
    gineering (ICSE 2008), Leipzig, Germany, May 10-18, 2008. pp. 461–470. ACM
    (2008). https://doi.org/10.1145/1368088.1368151
51. Zhang, J., Wang, X., Hao, D., Xie, B., Zhang, L., Mei, H.: A survey on bug-report
    analysis. Sci. China Inf. Sci. 58(2), 1–24 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/S11432-
    014-5241-2
52. Zhang, T., Han, D., Vinayakarao, V., Irsan, I.C., Xu, B., Thung, F., Lo, D., Jiang,
    L.: Duplicate bug report detection: How far are we? ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
    Methodol. 32(4), 97:1–97:32 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3576042
53. Zhao, L., Alhoshan, W., Ferrari, A., Letsholo, K.J., Ajagbe, M.A., Chioasca, E.,
    Batista-Navarro, R.T.: Natural language processing for requirements engineer-
    ing: A systematic mapping study. ACM Comput. Surv. 54(3), 55:1–55:41 (2022).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3444689
26      Montgomery et al.

54. Zhu, J., Zhou, M., Mei, H.: Multi-extract and multi-level dataset of mozilla
    issue tracking history. In: Kim, M., Robbes, R., Bird, C. (eds.) Proceed-
    ings of the 13th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories,
    MSR 2016, Austin, TX, USA, May 14-22, 2016. pp. 472–475. ACM (2016).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/2901739.2903502
55. Zimmermann, T., Premraj, R., Bettenburg, N., Just, S., Schröter, A., Weiss, C.:
    What makes a good bug report? IEEE Trans. Software Eng. 36(5), 618–643 (2010).
    https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2010.63
56. Zou, W., Lo, D., Chen, Z., Xia, X., Feng, Y., Xu, B.: How practitioners perceive
    automated bug report management techniques. IEEE Trans. Software Eng. 46(8),
    836–862 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2018.2870414
