                                                      An Empirical Study of the Evolution
                                                         of GitHub Actions Workflows

                                         Pooya Rostami Mazraea , Alexandre Decana,1 , Tom Mensa , Mairieli Wesselb
                                                    a Software Engineering Lab, University of Mons, Mons, Belgium
                                                           b Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
arXiv:2602.14572v3 [cs.SE] 1 Mar 2026




                                        Abstract
                                            CI/CD practices play a significant role during collaborative software devel-
                                        opment by automating time-consuming and repetitive tasks such as testing,
                                        building, quality checking, dependency and security management. GitHub Ac-
                                        tions, the CI/CD tool integrated into GitHub, allows repository maintainers to
                                        automate development workflows. We conducted a mixed methods analysis of
                                        GitHub Actions workflow changes over time. Through a preliminary qualitative
                                        analysis of 439 modified workflow files we identified seven types of conceptual
                                        changes to workflows. Next, we performed a quantitative analysis over 49K+
                                        GitHub repositories totaling 267K+ workflow change histories and 3.4M+ work-
                                        flow file versions from November 2019 to August 2025. This analysis revealed
                                        that repositories contain a median of three workflow files, and 7.3% of all work-
                                        flow files are being changed every week. The changes made to workflows tend to
                                        be small, with about three-quarters containing only a single change. The large
                                        majority of the observed changes have to do with task configuration and task
                                        specification in workflow jobs. We did not find any conclusive evidence of the
                                        effect of LLM coding tools or other major technological changes on workflow cre-
                                        ation and workflow maintenance frequency. Our findings highlight the need for
                                        improved tooling to support fine-grained maintenance tasks, such as a broader
                                        adoption of dependency management and AI-based support for ensuring and
                                        sustaining workflow security and quality.
                                        Keywords: collaborative software development, workflow automation,
                                        software repository mining, CI/CD, GitHub, software change


                                        1. Introduction
                                           Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) practices have
                                        become an essential part of software development [1, 2, 3], helping developers


                                             Email addresses: pooya.rostamimazrae@umons.ac.be (Pooya Rostami Mazrae),
                                        alexandre.decan@umons.ac.be (Alexandre Decan), tom.mens@umons.ac.be (Tom Mens),
                                        mairieli.wessel@ru.nl (Mairieli Wessel)
                                           1 F.R.S.-FNRS Research Associate
achieve more efficient and less labor-intensive software releases, while main-
taining high-quality standards [4]. The widespread adoption of CI/CD today
is heavily influenced by Agile Methods and Extreme Programming methodolo-
gies [5], which emphasize the automation of software production tasks. Over the
past two decades, CI/CD tools have been widely used to automate development-
related activities such as testing, building, quality checking, managing depen-
dencies and detecting security weaknesses [6, 7, 8, 9].
     GitHub Actions (GHA) was launched in November 2019 by GitHub, the
largest collaborative software development platform. Within 18 months, GHA
became the dominant CI/CD solution for GitHub repositories [10]. Decan et
al. [11] reported that by the end of January 2022, GHA had achieved an adoption
rate of 43.9% in a dataset of 68K GitHub repositories.
     Like many other CI/CD tools, GHA requires developers to define workflows
in configuration files to automate a repository’s CI/CD pipeline. Following the
Configuration as Code (CaC) practice, these configuration files are stored in a
human-readable YAML format within the repository. As such, workflow files
are subject to version-controlled changes throughout the repository’s lifetime.
These changes are driven by evolving software project requirements, technolog-
ical advancements, and the shifting needs of developers [12].
     Previous studies have sought to understand changes in workflow files for dif-
ferent CI/CD tools [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], with an important focus on Travis
CI, as it was the dominant CI/CD tool on GitHub before GHA’s introduc-
tion [10]. We are not aware of any large-scale study specifically focused on the
types of syntactic changes made to GHA workflow files. The analysis in this
paper aims to close this gap, and its results could be used to suggest various
improvements to maintaining GHA workflows, such as following best practices,
increasing the awareness and take-up of existing tools (such as Dependabot for
managing workflow dependencies), improving automated tool support (e.g. for
debugging, testing and refactoring workflows). The results can also instruct
other researchers to conduct future work in this domain.
     We carry out a mixed-method empirical analysis, formulated around four
research questions:

RQ1 How frequently are workflow files changed? We aim to identify and quan-
   tify how frequently workflow files are added, modified, renamed, or re-
   moved. Our results show that, while around 25% of repositories add more
   than one workflow file over their lifetime (with a median of three files per
   repository), modifications are the most common type of change to work-
   flow files. On average, workflow files are updated every 159 days, with
   7.3% of all files modified each week. Renaming and removal are much less
   common. Moreover, most removals tend to occur shortly after the work-
   flows’ creation, suggesting the experimental nature of such workflows. We
   also identify bursts (i.e., rapid successions) of workflow changes, suggesting
   the need for improved debugging and testing tools. We found no conclu-
   sive evidence that the introduction of LLM coding tools or other major
   technological changes might have impacted the workflow change frequency


                                        2
     or burst behaviour.
RQ2 Which conceptual changes are made to workflows? Through a qualita-
   tive manual inspection of commits modifying workflow files, we classify
   changes into seven high-level concepts of related syntactic entities. Our
   analysis of 439 commits reveal 1,109 individual changes dominated by
   modifications inside workflow files (53.4%). Most of these modifications
   (63.7%) belong to the concepts of task specification and task configura-
   tion, suggesting that maintainers primarily modify workflow steps to refine
   or extend functionality. Commits touching more than one workflow are
   relatively common but tend to apply similar routine maintenance-related
   changes to multiple workflows.

RQ3 What types of changes are made to workflows? We quantitatively analyze
   to which extent workflow entities are being added, removed, or modified
   during the evolution of workflows. Our results show that modifications
   dominate and this proportion continues to increase over time. Nonethe-
   less, changesets combining additions, removals, and modifications remain
   relevant for a non-negligible fraction of cases. We found no conclusive ev-
   idence that the introduction of LLM coding tools or other major techno-
   logical changes might have impacted the change frequency of fine-grained
   changes to workflow entities.
RQ4 Which syntactic entities are frequently changed in workflows? Building
   on the results of RQ2 and RQ3, we quantify the most frequent syntac-
   tic entities and workflow paths that are subject to changes. Our analysis
   shows that changes concentrate on task specification and task configura-
   tion, with the majority occurring in the workflow jobs, and more particu-
   larly its steps. Renaming fields and creating or updating workflow matrix
   strategies also play a notable role.

In general, this article has three main contributions: (i) we provide catalog of
seven types of conceptual changes in GHA workflow files based on a manual qual-
itative analysis of 439 workflow file modifications; (ii) we report on our finding
of a large-scale quantitative analysis over 267K+ workflow change histories from
workflow files across 49K+ public GitHub repositories covering 3.4M+ workflow
file versions from November 2019 to August 2025; (iii) we relate our findings to
previous work in the context of CI/CD and GitHub Actions, highlighting ob-
served changes, assessing potential improvements, and suggesting how to further
advance research and practice in the GitHub workflow ecosystem.
     The remainder of this article is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews re-
lated work, covering empirical research on CI/CD tools, the evolution of CI/CD
configuration files, and GitHub Actions. Section 3 describes the methodology
and dataset used for the study. Sections 4, 5, 6, and 7 present the results of
the empirical analysis of changes in GitHub Actions workflow files. Section 8
discusses the research findings, placing them in the context of related work on
CI/CD and GitHub Actions. Section 9 outlines potential threats to the validity


                                        3
of the study. Finally, Section 10 concludes the article and provides directions
for future work.


2. Related Work

   This section reviews the existing literature on the usage of CI/CD in software
projects (Section 2.1), the evolution of CI/CD tool usage prior to the advent of
GHA (Section 2.2), and the evolution of GHA usage specifically (Section 2.3).

2.1. Empirical research on CI/CD
    Systematic literature reviews (SLRs) provide valuable entry points to CI/CD
usage practices. The SLRs by Shahin et al. [2] and Soares et al. [18] reviewed
the scientific literature on the implementation, benefits, challenges, and short-
comings of CI/CD practices across various environments. These SLRs did not
include any research published after 2019, thus excluding GHA, which was in-
troduced in November 2019.
    Shahin et al. [2] reviewed 69 scientific articles published up to 2016, syn-
thesizing reported approaches, tools, challenges, and practices for adopting and
implementing continuous practices. The studies highlighted increased adoption
of continuous practices, integration problems, and benefits such as reduced build
and test time, improved visibility and awareness of results, and enhanced de-
ployment pipelines regarding security, scalability, dependability, and reliability.
Soares et al. [18] examined 101 scientific articles on CI/CD usage published be-
fore 2019, identifying empirical evidence on the impact of CI/CD on software
development. They observed a correlation between CI/CD usage and improved
productivity, efficiency, and developer confidence. CI/CD practices promote
faster iterations, stability, predictability, and transparency, and benefit pull-
based development by improving integration processes.
    Several case studies have explored CI/CD usage, cost, and benefits in the
context of companies: Chen [19, 20] reported on the benefits and challenges of
continuous delivery (CD) practices at Paddy Power, including accelerated time
to market, improved productivity and efficiency, increased release reliability, and
enhanced product quality and customer satisfaction. Betz et al. [21] studied the
impact of adopting a CI/CD tool in developing AMBER, a molecular dynamics
software package. They reported improved collaboration and communication
among globally distributed developers and real-time reporting of failures and
benchmark information. Lu et al. [22] conducted a case study on D5000, a
smart grid scheduling support system, showing that CI and automated testing
effectively resolved quality and integration issues without significant overhead.
Kulas et al. [23] highlighted how CI/CD practices reduced development time
for ARGOS, a software system for processing images produced by a telescope.
Using Jenkins for automated testing ensured the correctness of changes under
strict time constraints. Gmeiner et al. [24] examined CI/CD tool usage in an
Austrian online business company, addressing technical and organizational chal-
lenges over six years of maintaining an effective CD pipeline. Savor et al. [4]


                                        4
studied CI/CD usage at Facebook and OANDA, revealing limitations in fully
utilizing continuous deployment due to policy constraints, leading to delays in
delivering new features. Jin et al. [25] performed a case study of using CI/CD at
ByteDance, observing that the introduction of configuration files improved the
reliability and flexibility of CI/CD pipelines. It encouraged users to build and
deploy more frequently and resulted in CI/CD pipelines with fewer steps, higher
build frequency, longer build duration, higher success rate, and higher change
frequency. Elazhary et al. [26] identified benefits and challenges of CI/CD prac-
tices in three software development organizations, based on interviews with
18 employees. Benefits included minimizing merge conflicts, increasing build
consistency and reproducibility, and enhancing feedback. Challenges included
difficulties in UI testing, longer build times, PR review bottlenecks, scalability
issues, and increased maintenance effort.
     Others have studied the impact of CI/CD on open source software (OSS)
development. Zampetti et al. [27] studied the usage of static analysis tools to en-
able early detection of potential faults, vulnerabilities, and code smells through
their adoption of CI pipelines. By analysing 20 Java OSS projects hosted on
GitHub and using Travis, they showed that static analysis tools are used to
induce failing builds to highlight non-adherence to coding standards and miss-
ing licenses. Build failures to highlight potential bugs or vulnerabilities occur
less frequently, and in some cases, such tools are activated in a “softer” mode,
without making the build fail. The study also reveals that the aforementioned
build breakages are quickly fixed by actually solving the problem, rather than
by disabling the warning, and are often properly documented. Hilton et al. [8]
looked into the usage, costs, and benefits of CI/CD in 34,544 OSS projects on
GitHub. They observed that CI/CD is widely adopted by the most popular
projects, with an increase in the adoption of CI/CD over time. CI/CD was
observed to help projects release more often, and a wide variety of CI/CD tools
were used by the projects, with Travis, CircleCI, AppVeyor, CloudBees, and
Werker being the most popular ones. Vasilescu et al. [7] studied the quality
and productivity outcomes ensuing from embracing CI/CD practices in OSS
projects on GitHub. They observed that teams using CI/CD are significantly
more effective at merging pull requests submitted by core members. CI/CD was
also associated with external contributors having fewer pull requests rejected.
Moreover, core developers in teams using CI/CD tools discover significantly
more bugs than in teams not using such tools.
     The mentioned studies are among many that have explored the benefits,
challenges, and practices of CI/CD in software projects. These studies have
demonstrated that CI/CD practices can significantly enhance productivity, ef-
ficiency, and quality in software development. However, they have not focused
on the evolution of CI/CD configurations over time, which is the focus of the
following section.

2.2. Evolution of CI/CD usage prior to GitHub Actions
    Many CI/CD tools that were in popular use long before the advent of GHA
rely on (often YAML-based) configuration files for their CI/CD configuration


                                        5
pipelines. Examples of such tools are Travis, Jenkins, GitLab CI/CD, and Cir-
cleCI. Versioning CI/CD configuration files is an instance of the wider practice
known as Configuration as Code (CaC), which involves encoding configuration
settings in a human-readable format (e.g., YAML) and syntax, aligning configu-
ration management with modern software development practices. CaC provides
better opportunities for versioning, code reviewing, and change automation. In
the context of CI/CD, CaC allows configurations to be updated, tested, and de-
ployed automatically alongside application code, ensuring that application and
infrastructure changes are coordinated.
    The popularity of Travis on GitHub before the advent of GHA has led many
researchers to study this CI/CD tool. Gallaba and McIntosh [13] investigated
the usage and misuse of features in Travis configuration files in 9,312 GitHub
repositories. They found that job processing nodes were the most frequently
modified, indicating that Travis was predominantly used for CI rather than
CD. They also developed tools to identify and remove anti-patterns in Travis
configuration files. Similarly, Vassallo et al. [28] created a tool to detect anti-
patterns in Java projects using Travis. They based their identification of critical
anti-patterns on Duvall’s work [1], which served as a benchmark for quality
checking in continuous integration.
    Durieux et al. [14] compiled a dataset of over 35 million Travis jobs from
272,917 projects. They discovered that the majority of the 709,000+ commits
that modified Travis configuration files were related to debugging. This finding
highlighted the need for more in-depth analysis of the nature of these changes.
Zampetti et al. [15] identified 79 bad CI practices through semi-structured inter-
views with 13 experts and an analysis of over 2,300 Stack Overflow posts. They
also studied the evolution of changes to Travis configuration pipelines, finding
that jobs and steps were the most frequently changed components, and noted
an increasing adoption of Docker over time [16].
    Apart from Travis, many other CI/CD tools have been used in GitHub
repositories. Golzadeh et al. [10] studied the adoption of CI/CD tools in over
91,000 GitHub repositories related to npm packages. They found that by May
2021, more than 50% of the repositories used CI/CD tools, with GitHub Actions
and Travis being the most prevalent. Remarkably, GitHub Actions replaced
Travis as the leading CI/CD tool within 18 months of its introduction, and
many repositories transitioned from Travis to GitHub Actions.

2.3. Popularity and Usage of GitHub Actions
    The introduction of GHA significantly transformed the CI/CD landscape
on GitHub. The wide array of features and integrations offered by GHA, par-
ticularly the concept of Actions as reusable components in CI/CD workflows,
proved to be a game-changer. These Actions can be introduced not only by
GitHub but also by the community, enhancing the flexibility and utility of the
platform.
    Numerous studies have investigated the usage and evolution of GitHub Ac-
tions in GitHub repositories. Kinsman et al. [29] analyzed the impact of GHA


                                        6
adoption in 3,190 GitHub repositories and investigated how developers use Ac-
tions and how several activity indicators change after their adoption. They re-
ported an increase in rejected pull requests and a decrease in commits in merged
pull requests. Their manual inspection of 209 GHA-related issues revealed that
developers generally had a positive perception of GHA and the use of Actions.
These findings were corroborated by Chen et al. [30] in a replication study in-
volving 6,246 repositories. Decan et al. [11] examined the use of GHA in nearly
70,000 GitHub repositories, finding that 43.9% used GHA workflows. They
characterized these workflows by their use of jobs, steps, and reusable Actions,
demonstrating that most workflows were used to automate the development
process rather than deployment automation. They also found that the major-
ity of reused Actions were provided by GitHub itself, primarily for checking
out the repository or setting up a development environment. Rostami Mazrae
et al. [6] investigated the reasons behind CI/CD tool adoption, co-usage, and
migration in software projects. Their study highlighted GHA’s dominance due
to its strong GitHub integration, ease of use, extensive marketplace of Actions,
and the generous free tier provided for all users and open-source projects.
    Valenzuela-Toledo and Bergel [17] conducted a preliminary study on the us-
age and maintenance of GHA workflows in ten popular GitHub repositories,
analyzing 222 commits to propose an initial taxonomy of workflow modifica-
tions. Saroar et al. [31] surveyed 90 producers and users of reusable Action
components to understand motivations and best practices in using, developing,
and debugging Actions, as well as associated challenges. They found that users
preferred Actions with verified producers and more stars and often switched to
alternative Actions when facing issues. Wessel et al. [3] suggested studying GHA
as a software ecosystem facing challenges similar to traditional software library
ecosystems [32, 33]. Moreover, Onsori Delicheh et al. [34] studied security issues
in reusable JavaScript Actions in GitHub workflows and showed that more than
54% of the studied Actions contain at least one security weakness, and a small
subset of these weaknesses recur frequently in their code. For example, 7 out of
the top 10 most frequent weakness types are associated with CWE-20 (Improper
Input Validation). They observed that a huge amount of GitHub repositories
are potentially exposed to security issues in their associated workflows.
    Rostami Mazrae et al. [12] examined workflow file changes but did not delve
deeply into the specific modifications within the workflow files. They showed
that workflows are subject to the laws of continuing change and continuing
growth [35] and that modification of the contents of workflow files is the dom-
inant type of changes. Huang et al. [36] developed a tool that recommends
Actions for GHA workflows based on static information of Action usage. The
effectiveness of such tools could be further enhanced by considering the evolution
of workflows and the changes they undergo over time. Zhang et al. [37] stud-
ied the effectiveness of large language models in producing correct workflows,
detecting syntactic errors, and identifying code injection vulnerabilities. Their
work could benefit from labeled data categorized by types of changes through
time to improve the model performance. Valenzuela-Toledo et al. [38] con-
ducted a large-scale empirical investigation to characterize the maintenance of


                                        7
GHA workflows, examining the evolution of workflow files in 183 mature GitHub
projects across ten programming languages. They found that while GHA im-
proves efficiency, automation introduces hidden costs that need to be properly
managed. As a result, practitioners must plan and allocate sufficient resources
for maintaining these workflows, including the identification and documentation
of best practices. Khatami et al. [39] investigated GHA workflows to identify
potential smells. They reported 22 distinct smells, categorized into three main
groups: security, performance/optimization, and general CI/CD smells. They
developed a tool to automatically detect these smells in GHA workflows. Al-
though their study touched on patterns of frequent changes in GHA workflows,
they did not explore these patterns in depth.
    In this study, we aim to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the
evolution of changes made to GHA workflows by combining qualitative and
quantitative analyses of workflow changes over time.


3. Methodology

    Building further on existing research (Section 2), this article aims to un-
derstand how GHA workflows change over time, focusing initially on file-level
changes, after which changes to the actual workflow contents are explored. A
mixed methods research design [40] is adopted, combining quantitative and
qualitative analyses. Section 3.1 presents the GHA syntax to allow the reader
to understand the structure and components of workflows, and Section 3.2 de-
scribes the dataset that is used for this study.
    The data and code produced to replicate the analysis are available on Zen-
odo. 2

3.1. GitHub Actions syntax
    To enable GHA on a GitHub repository, one or more YAML files, each de-
scribing a single workflow, should be created and stored in the .github/workflows
folder. Each workflow is triggered by some event(s) (e.g., when a pull request
is submitted, when an issue is created) and performs one or more jobs that are
composed of one or more steps. These steps are either specified in terms of the
commands they execute (run keyword) or by delegating their implementation
to so-called reusable Actions (uses keyword). Fig. 1 provides a real example of
a workflow file to automate dependency checks in the repository of the Apache
NetBeans project.3
    We start by introducing the terminology that will be used throughout this
paper. A workflow YAML file is merely a collection of key-value pairs with
support for nested mappings and nested sequences. As such, a workflow is a
kind of tree. We refer to tree nodes as entities, and to their specific position

  2 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18414913
   3 https://github.com/apache/netbeans/blob/d19b752/.github/workflows/

dependency-checks.yml



                                        8
in the tree as a path, which is a dot-separated sequence of entity names and
sequence indexes. For example, we can access the value of the name entity of
the first step of Fig. 1 (line 17) through the path jobs.base-build.steps[0].
name, indicating that the entity can be reached by the sequence composed of the
jobs entity, the base-build entity, the first item4 in the steps entity, and finally
the name entity. Most of the keys of workflow entities are imposed by the GHA
syntax specification.5 For those that are not syntactically imposed, such as a
job id (e.g., base-build) or a parameter name (e.g., persist-credentials in
jobs.base-build.steps[0].with.persist-credentials on line 20), we will
occasionally use a generic notation such as jobs.<id>.steps[<nr>].with.<p
arameter>.
    Revisiting the example of Fig. 1, the workflow_dispatch entity (line 3) signals
that users can manually trigger the workflow to run. The workflow defines a
single job with id base-build (line 12) and name “Check Dependencies” (line
13). It runs on the latest version of Ubuntu (line 14) and has a timeout of 20
minutes (line 15) to avoid prolonged or stalled runs. The job is composed of
three sequential steps. The first step (lines 17-22) checks out the repository’s
code, using the actions/checkout action (line 18) without storing credentials (line
20) nor cloning submodules (line 21). The second step (lines 23-27) uses the
actions/setup-java action to set up a Java runtime environment for version 21 of
the Zulu distribution. The third step (lines 28-35) performs dependency checks
on specific Maven artifacts by running a series of command-line instructions
(run on lines 29-35). Finally, the concurrency control (lines 4-7) prevents multiple
instances of the same workflow from running simultaneously on the same branch,
and ensures that ongoing runs are cancelled if a new one starts (line 7).

3.2. Dataset
    To conduct a large-scale empirical analysis of workflow changes over time,
we need a large collection of GHA workflow histories. To do so, we rely on the
2025-10-096 version of a dataset obtained from public GitHub repositories that
were both popular and active at the time of data collection, meaning reposi-
tories with a star count above a certain threshold, a high number of commits,
and recent activity [41]. The dataset contains 267,955 workflow histories ob-
tained from 49,258 GitHub repositories, accounting for 3,418,911 workflow file
snapshots. It includes all the commits that were made to these workflows, from
their introduction in the repositories to their removal (if any) or up to the data
collection date of 25 August 2025. Among others, the dataset provides, for each
workflow history, a unique uid to keep track of renamed workflow files and, for
each commit, its date, the name of the workflow file before and after the com-
mit, and a hash value of the file contents before and after the commit. Since

  4 We start counting from zero, hence steps[0]
  5 https://docs.github.com/en/actions
  6 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17301952




                                             9
 1   name : NetBeans Dependency Checks
 2   on :
 3     workflow_dispatch :
 4   concurrency :
 5     group : |
 6         dep−checker−$ {{ g i t h u b . head_ref | | g i t h u b . run_id }}−${{ g i t h u b .
                   ,→ b a s e _ r e f }}
 7     cancel−in−progress : t r u e
 8   defaults :
 9     run :
10      s h e l l : bash
11   jobs :
12     base−build :
13         name : Check D e p e n d e n c i e s
14         runs−on : u b u n t u − l a t e s t
15         timeout−minutes : 20
16         steps :
17             − name : Checkout $ {{ g i t h u b . r e f }} ( $ {{ g i t h u b . sha }} )
18                  uses : a c t i o n s / checkout@v4
19                  with :
20                    persist−credentials : f a l s e
21                    submodules : f a l s e
22                    show−progress : f a l s e
23             − name : S e t up JDK
24                  uses : a c t i o n s / setup−java@v4
25                  with :
26                    java−version : 21
27                    distribution : " zulu "
28             − name : Check D e p e n d e n c i e s
29                  run : |
30                    DEPS=o r g . apache . maven : m a v e n − a r t i f a c t : 3 . 9 . 9 , o r g . apache .
                             ,→ maven . i n d e x e r : search−backend−smo : 7 . 1 . 5
31                    mvn eu . m a v e n i v e r s e . maven . p l u g i n s : t o o l b o x :
                             ,→ g a v − c o p y − t r a n s i t i v e −Dgav=$DEPS −DsinkSpec=" f l a t
                             ,→ ( . / l i b ) "
32                    echo "<pre >" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
33                    j a v a −cp " l i b /∗" . g i t h u b / s c r i p t s / B i n a r i e s L i s t U p d a t e s . j a v a
                             ,→ . / | t e e −a $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
34                    echo "</pre >" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
35                    rm −Rf l i b


     Figure 1: Example of a GitHub Actions workflow file dependency-checks.yml taken from the
     Apache NetBeans project.


     the dataset also contains the contents of all workflow files, this hash value can
     be used to compare the file contents before and after each commit.
        We apply two additional filters to this dataset, motivated by the need to
     obtain valid workflow histories and ensure consistent temporal coverage:
         1. Ensuring valid workflow histories. 776,339 of the 3,418,911 workflow
            file snapshots are flagged as invalid YAML files. These cases are problem-
            atic since they cannot be parsed in order to detect the changes made to
            them. Removing only these invalid files does not suffice as it would lead
            to incomplete workflow histories. Consider for example a workflow history


                                                                10
      of consecutive workflow files A, B and C, where B is not a valid YAML
      file. Removing B from this workflow history would erroneously aggregate
      the changes from A to B and from B to C into a single set of changes from
      A to C. To avoid such problems, we excluded from the dataset the 30,922
      workflow histories containing an invalid YAML file.
   2. Ensuring consistent temporal coverage. Since the analysis is based
      on weekly observations, we restrict the observation period to complete
      weeks only, from Sundays to Saturdays. We excluded the last two days
      from the dataset so that the observation period covers 316 complete weeks,
      starting on Sunday 4 August 2019 and ending on Saturday 23 August 2025.
   After these steps, the final dataset comprises 236,775 workflow histories from
47,488 repositories, accounting for 2,640,584 workflow file snapshots (abbrevi-
ated to workflow files in the remainder).


                        workflow histories
      200000            workflow files
                        repositories
      150000
      100000
       50000
            0
                 2020        2021        2022        2023       2024        2025

Figure 2: Evolution of the number of GitHub repositories, workflow files, and workflow histo-
ries in the dataset.

     Fig. 2 shows the evolution of the number of GitHub repositories, workflow
files and workflow histories in the dataset. One can observe that the number of
repositories using GHA is increasing through time, and the number of workflow
files and workflow histories are growing at a faster pace, indicating that more
and more workflows are being added to the repositories. The slight variations
that can be observed in late 2020 coincides with restrictions imposed by Travis (a
competing CI/CD service) on its free plan, leading many repositories to migrate
from Travis to GHA [10, 12].


4. RQ1: How frequently are workflow files changed?

    The first research question aims to quantify to which extent workflow files
are subject to changes during their lifetime. To do so, we consider four different
change types, namely addition of a new workflow file to the repository, removal
of the workflow file from the repository, modification of the workflow file contents
w.r.t. its predecessor in its workflow history, and renaming the workflow file


                                             11
w.r.t. the previous one in its workflow history. For each workflow file in the
dataset, we compute its change type w.r.t. its predecessor in its workflow history.


                        25000          addition
                                       modification
                                       removal
    number of changes


                        20000
                                       renaming
                        15000
                        10000
                        5000
                           0
                                2020        2021      2022        2023       2024       2025

                          Figure 3: Weekly number of workflow file changes, per change type.

    Overall, we found 2,330,529 modifications, 236,775 additions, 68,083 re-
movals, and 29,159 file renamings. Fig. 3 breaks this down into the weekly
number of observed workflow file changes. The overwhelming majority of work-
flow file changes are modifications, more than a fivefold of all other change type
occurrences combined. The number of modifications tends to increase through
time, which is probably a consequence of the fact that more and more workflows
are added through time (as observed in Fig. 2). Additions and removals tend
to remain quite stable through time, which is a consequence of the fact that a
workflow can only be added or removed once throughout its history. We found
that 24.9% of the repositories have more than one workflow file added to them,
with a median of three workflow files per repository.
    Looking more closely at the changes through time in Fig. 3, we observe some
peaks and troughs at specific times, regardless of the change type. The troughs
coincide with the end of year holidays, during which developers are less likely
to work and change their workflows. The peaks will be examined in more detail
as part of RQ3 and RQ4 that delve deeper into the changes to the workflow
contents and to the values of workflow entities.
    To determine whether the observed increase in modifications is mainly due
to more workflow files being added over time, or rather to workflow files be-
ing modified more frequently, we repeated the previous analysis by computing
the weekly proportion of workflow files exhibiting a change of a given type. In
Fig. 4, the “weekly proportion” is calculated as the number of workflow files that
experienced a specific type of event (addition, modification, removal, or renam-
ing) during a given week, divided by the total number of workflow files that
existed in that week. This normalization allows to assess the relative likelihood
of workflows undergoing a change of a given type, independent of the overall
growth in the number of workflows. On average, per week 7.3% of the workflow


                                                         12
                                     0.200
                                                                               addition               removal
    weekly proportion of workflows
                                     0.175                                     modification           rename
                                     0.150
                                     0.125
                                     0.100
                                     0.075
                                     0.050
                                     0.025
                                     0.000
                                         2020       2021         2022        2023         2024        2025

                                        Figure 4: Weekly proportion of workflow files exhibiting a change.


files are modified, 2.1% are added, 0.4% are removed, and 0.2% are renamed.
     To answer RQ1 we examined the average change rate of workflow files. To do
so, we identified all commits touching a particular workflow file, and we divided
the workflow’s lifespan by the number of times it was touched. We observed
that, on average, workflow files are updated every 159 days, with 25% (Q1) of
workflow files being touched every 31 days, and 50% (median) every 82 days.

 Takeaways. Around 25% of all repositories add more than one workflow file
 throughout their lifetime, with a median of three workflow files per repos-
 itory. Workflow files are updated on average every 159 days, with 7.3% of
 workflow files being modified each week. While workflow files can be added,
 modified, renamed or removed, modifications clearly dominate, whereas re-
 naming and removal are uncommon.


Short-lived workflow files. While the overall frequency of workflow file removals
is low, examining when these removals occur provides additional insight into
workflow maintenance behavior. In particular, we aimed to understand whether
workflow files that are removed tend to be short-lived or long-standing configu-
rations files. To this end, Fig. 5 shows the distribution of removed workflow files
relative to their lifespan (i.e., the duration between the commit that introduced
the workflow file and the commit that removed it). We grouped these durations
into monthly intervals and computed their relative proportions (i.e., normalized
by the total number of removed workflow files). The figure allows to examine
not just the absolute number of removals, but their relative prevalence across
different lifespan ranges. One can observe that a substantial fraction of workflow
files are removed shortly after their creation. Specifically, 15.2% of all removed
workflow files were deleted within the first day, 20.6% within the first week, and
29.0% within the first month. In total, 68,083 workflow files were removed at


                                                                        13
                                           0.30

    proportion of removed workflow files   0.25

                                           0.20

                                           0.15

                                           0.10

                                           0.05

                                           0.00
                                                  0         1              2                3             4             5           6
                                                                         workflow file life duration in years

                                           Figure 5: Proportion of removed workflow files with respect to their lifespan.

                               Table 1: Workflow burst statistics under varying commit time intervals, showing
                               prevalence, burst count, and commit density.
                                                       # workflow          % workflow                  mean                 mean
                                              time        histories           histories              #bursts           #commits
                                           interval    with bursts         with bursts          per workflow            in bursts
                                            15 mins             20,277             15.37%                       1.52         3.90
                                            30 mins             25,488             19.31%                       1.57         4.05
                                            60 mins             29,932             22.68%                       1.59         4.12




some point in their lifetime, a significant fraction of which were removed soon
after their creation. Given the short lifespan and limited impact of short-lived
workflows on long-term workflow maintenance efforts, we recommend that fu-
ture longitudinal studies aiming to characterize sustained maintenance practices
consider excluding such ephemeral workflow files. However, we also recognize
the value of studying short-lived workflows in their own right, for example, to
understand exploration, onboarding patterns, or rapid prototyping activities on
GitHub software projects and their associated workflows.

 Takeaways. Removing workflow files is uncommon, and such removals tend
 to occur shortly after the workflows’ creation.


Commit bursts. While we have showed that workflow files are frequently modi-
fied throughout their lifetime, these aggregate statistics do not reveal how such
changes are distributed over time. To better understand whether workflow main-
tenance occurs as steady, continuous activity or rather as short, intense editing
sessions, we examined the temporal clustering of commits touching the same
workflow file.


                                                                                     14
     Nagappan et al. [42] studied commit “bursts” in software components as
defect predictors. We investigate whether similar short bursts of rapid commits
also occur for workflow files, signaling trial-and-error debugging attempts to fix
failing workflows. To do so, we apply a temporal clustering algorithm on the
dataset to identify workflow burst episodes. We define a burst as a chain of at
least three (not necessarily consecutive) commits belonging to the same workflow
history, in which each commit occurs within a fixed short time interval of the
previous one. Table 1 reports the results using three thresholds for this time
interval: 15, 30, and 60 minutes. For the 60-minute interval we observed bursts
in 22.68% (29,932) of all workflow histories, with a relative commit density of
4.13 commits on average per burst (median of 3). For the shortest interval
of 15 minutes, there were still 15.37% (20,277) of all workflow histories with
burst activity. Across all three time intervals, the mean number of bursts per
workflow history remained around 1.55, with each burst typically comprising
3 (50th percentile) to 4 commits (75th percentile). We also observed a non-
negligible number of longer and more intense bursts. For example, for the 15,
30, and 60 minute intervals, we identified respectively 1,273, 2,120, and 2,818
bursts containing at least 8 commits. Some more extreme cases involve up to 43
commits 7 for the 15-minute interval and up to 50 commits 8 for the 60-minute
interval. These findings confirm that bursty, high-frequency workflow commits
are not uncommon. A substantial number of workflow histories, up to one in
ten, show signs of clustered change sequences that may reflect iterative testing
and debugging.
     Taken together, this temporal analysis supports our hypothesis that work-
flows are frequently changed through short, iterative editing sessions, likely to
fix bugs in response to failing workflows. Further analysis of workflow execution
logs would be necessary to fully validate this trial-and-error behavior, but is
considered out of scope of the current paper.
 Takeaways. Bursts of rapid successions of workflow changes are not uncom-
 mon, suggesting the need for improved debugging and testing tools.

    LLM-powered coding tools such as Copilot, Claude Code and ChatGPT have
emerged since 2021 and are becoming increasingly integrated in software devel-
opment, leading to important shifts in developer roles [43]. As a consequence,
the emergence and increasing use of such tools might have lead to important
changes in how new workflows are created or how existing workflows continue to
be maintained over time. To verify this hypothesis, we carry out a time-based
comparison of both kinds of evolution scenarios before and after the emergence
of such tools. As shown in Fig. 6, we compare two distinct 695-day periods of
our dataset, corresponding respectively to the initial situation of GHA workflow

   7 First commit of the burst:    https://github.com/FreeTubeApp/FreeTube/commit/
1c9959ccfc020475caf1e632c30149cb30cd9b78
   8 First  commit  of   the   burst:     https://github.com/iptv-org/iptv/commit/
21c58cccae1a4c570e40e271cdd88054741bdd57


                                       15
                                                                     Claude Code
                                                                                   ChatGPT
                                          CoPilot
              22,254 early workflows                                                           26,449 early workflows
               5,372 later workflows                                                            7,581 later workflows


                   before: 695 days                 exclusion period: 821 days                       after: 695 days

      2019-08-04                      2021-06-29                                        2023-09-28                     2025-08-23




Figure 6: Comparison of early and later-phase workflow histories before and after introduction
of LLM-powered coding tools and other major technological changes to GitHub Actions.


usage before the existence of LLM coding tools, and the more recent situation
of workflow usage after such tools have become integrated and used in GitHub
repositories. These before and after periods are separated by an exclusion pe-
riod of 821 days, starting at the day that Copilot became part of the GitHub
platform, and including the emergence of other AI coding tools and many other
technological changes. Within both periods we select all early-phase workflow
histories reflecting the first three months of file changes for a given workflow his-
tory since its creation (i.e., since the first commit that created the workflow file).
We also select all later-phase workflow histories reflecting the three months of
file changes from month nine to twelve of the workflow history, considering only
those workflows with at least one year of activity within the considered period.
We compare three change metrics for both early- and later -phase workflow his-
tories between the before and after periods:

change frequency is the number of commits touching the workflow during
    the considered three-month history
bursts per workflow counts the number of bursts during the three-month
     workflow history, focusing only on the subsets of early-phase and later-
     phase histories that contain at least one burst

commits per burst counts the number of commits observed in each burst
   considered in the previous metric
As for Table 1, we compute three variants of the last two metrics, for burst
time intervals of 15, 30 and 60 minutes, respectively. We apply non-parametric
Mann-Whitney U tests to find statistical evidence of differences for (each variant
of) each metric, using a significance level of α = 0.01 after Bonferroni correc-
tion to control the family-wise error rate induced by multiple tests applied to
the same populations [44]. In those cases where the null hypothesis (H0 ) can
be rejected, we use Cliff’s δ effect size measure to quantify the magnitude of
observed differences, and interpret its value according to Romano et al. [45].
    For the change frequency metric, H0 is rejected for both early- and later-
phase workflows, reflecting a decreased change frequency in the after period.
However, the effect size is negligible (δ < 0.147). For the bursts per workflow


                                                              16
metric, H0 is only rejected when comparing 15-minute burst intervals for early-
stage workflows, but the effect size remains negligible. For the commits per
burst metric, H0 is never rejected. Taken together, this comparative analysis
does not reveal any conclusive impact of the use of LLM coding tools, or any
other important technological change during the exclusion period.

 Takeaways. There is no conclusive evidence that the introduction of LLM
 coding tools or other major technological changes have impacted the work-
 flow change frequency or burst behaviour.



5. RQ2: Which conceptual changes are made to workflows?

    RQ1 revealed that a significant proportion of workflow files undergo frequent
modifications throughout their lifetime. With RQ2 we aim to qualitatively anal-
yse the nature and location of the changes made to the workflow contents stored
in these files. This will allow to assess whether specific kinds of changes are more
frequent than others, thus providing the basis for a large-scale quantitative anal-
ysis in the next RQs.
    We conducted a manual qualitative investigation of the changes made to the
contents of a small yet statistically representative sample of workflow files. All
four authors were actively involved in this process, with the first author leading
the design, coordination, and execution of the main tasks. We followed the
framework method [46] to identify and categorize conceptual changes to GHA
workflows.
    We began by familiarizing [46] ourselves with the syntax and structure of
workflows to understand the possible changes that can be made to them. During
this stage of framework identification [46], we realized that most workflow file
modifications could be mapped to changes of specific syntactic entities (such as
triggers, environment variables, matrix strategies, jobs, and steps).
    During a subsequent indexing phase [46], we qualitatively examined a sta-
tistically representative number of modified workflow files. We aimed for a 95%
confidence level with a 5% margin of error [47]. This required randomly sampling
389 distinct workflow histories from our dataset (Section 3.2). Each workflow
history was chosen from a different repository to ensure diversity. From each
workflow history, we arbitrarily selected one workflow file for manual analy-
sis. Its changes relative to its predecessor were obtained from the git commit
information.
    The sample of 389 cases was divided into three batches, each randomly
assigned to two authors for independent classification. Each author identified
all observed changes to the contents of the assigned workflow file, as well as
their change type (i.e., addition, modification, or removal), providing clarifying
comments when necessary. At the end of this process, the two authors compared
and merged their lists of identified changes and resolved disagreements. In the
few cases where consensus could not be reached, a third author intervened to


                                        17
Table 2: Conceptual changes being made to workflows, together with the number and pro-
portion of occurrences observed in the considered sample of 439 modified workflow files.
                                      all changes               change type
   concept                             #        %    modifs.     additions   removals
   Task Specification (TS)          441   39.8%        196          145         100
   Task Configuration (TC)          265   23.9%        226            21          18
   Documentation (D)                201   18.1%          64           87          50
   Runtime Configuration (RC)        85    7.6%          50           26           9
   Execution Triggers (ET)           46    4.2%          23           19           4
   Execution Rules (ER)              43    3.9%          14           16          13
   Formatting (F)                    28    2.5%          19            2           7
   total                          1,109    100%      53.4%        28.5%       18.1%




come to an agreement. At the end of this step, for each workflow file, we have
set of changes like ‘change an instruction in run: step’ or ‘add job permission’.
    To ensure saturation, we continued the above process by iteratively analysing
ten additional workflow file modifications at a time. After processing 50 more
cases in this way, we observed that the last batch did not yield noteworthy
new information, concluding that saturation was reached. Considering all 439
analysed cases in total (389 + 50), we reduced the margin of error to 4.67%
while keeping the 95% confidence level.
    We then charted [46] the documented changes by systematically mapping
all changed workflow entities into a provisional classification scheme of change
types (addition, modification, removal). For instance, we mapped the observed
workflow modification ‘change an instruction in run: step’ to a ‘modification’
at ‘step’ level for a ‘command’. Similarly, we mapped the observed workflow
modification ‘add job permission’ to an ‘addition’ at ‘job’ level for ‘permissions’.
This charting allowed us to refine and consolidate the initial categories that had
emerged during the indexing phase.
    The final step consisted of interpretation [46], i.e., abstracting the concrete
change types towards higher-level conceptual categories. We employed an open
card-sorting approach, allowing broader concepts to emerge from the classifi-
cation of the charting phase, without imposing any pre-defined concepts [48].
The coding during this step was performed by the first author, followed by a
review and discussion with the other authors until a negotiated agreement was
reached [49].
    The outcome of this step was a set of seven concepts of identified workflow
changes. Table 2 reports on each of these concepts, providing the number of
changes overall and per change type (i.e., modification, addition, and removal)
in the considered sample of 439 cases. In total, 1,109 change types were ob-
served, each associated with one specific concept. 53.4% of these changes were
modifications, 28.5% were additions, and 18.1% were removals. Below we dis-
cuss each of the seven concepts in detail. The first three concepts constitute the
large majority (81.8%) of all observed changes:
    Task Specification (TS) is the concept referring to the structure and logic



                                          18
that defines what tasks are performed in the workflow, and how they are ex-
ecuted. Entities belonging to this concept are changed the most frequently
(39.8% of all observed changes). They also correspond to the highest number
of additions and removals. Changes belonging to this concept include the intro-
duction, removal and reordering of jobs and steps, as well as changing the uses
and run specifications of steps. Another frequent category of changes is adding
or modifying a matrix strategy (matrix, strategy, include and exclude keywords)
to allow jobs to run multiple times based on the combination of variables used
in the matrix definition. Moreover, changes of the command of the steps for run
were also observed frequently.
    Task Configuration (TC) is the concept covering the detailed settings of how
individual steps are configured and executed within a workflow job. Entities
belonging to this concept are changed quite frequently (23.9% of all observed
changes) and correspond to the highest number of modifications observed during
the qualitative analysis. Most of these modifications relate to the configuration
of reusable Actions such as changing their versions (uses keyword) and their
parameters. Other entities that belong to this concept are defining working
directories (working-directory), declaring and using jobs and step identifiers (id),
and managing outputs of steps to be used by other jobs (outputs).
    Documentation (D) is the concept referring to the practice of providing de-
scriptive information that explains or clarifies various parts of the workflow.
Such documentation increases the readability and understandability of the pur-
pose, structure, and behavior of the workflow. This can be achieved by providing
human-readable names (name) for workflows, jobs, or steps, or by including com-
ments in the YAML file. Entities belonging to this concept are changed quite
frequently (18.1% of all observed changes). Most of the changes are related to
adding or modifying names in different parts of the workflow file.

    The next four concepts are considerably less subject to changes, accounting
for only 18.2% of all observed changes.
    Runtime Configuration (RC) refers to the settings that control how and
where the workflow needs to run. Proper runtime configuration ensures that
workflows are efficient, secure, and adaptable to different project needs or en-
vironments. This includes defining the environment in which jobs will operate,
ensuring it behaves as intended when it is triggered (env), setting global defaults
for jobs (defaults), specifying the operating system or platform (runs-on), and
managing the security permissions required for the workflow to perform specific
actions (permissions). These settings are crucial for ensuring consistency across
environments, and controlling the access the workflow has during execution.
Despite their importance, entities belonging to this concept are changed less
frequently (7.6% of all observed changes).
    Execution Triggers (ET) refer to the mechanisms that determine when a
workflow is activated and executed. These triggers define the specific events
or conditions that prompt the workflow to run (on), allowing for automated
responses to various activities within a repository. By configuring execution
triggers, developers can specify the types of events, such as code pushes (push),


                                        19
pull requests (pull_request), or issue comments, that will initiate the workflow.
Additionally, these configurations may include details about the data associated
with these events, enabling the workflow to respond appropriately based on
the context of the trigger. Understanding and managing execution triggers
is essential for creating efficient and responsive workflows that align with the
development lifecycle and project requirements. However, once declared in the
workflow, these entities are changed infrequently (4.2% of all observed changes),
as they are typically set up at the beginning of the workflow development process
and remain stable throughout the workflow’s lifecycle.
    Execution Rules (ER) establish the conditions under which workflow jobs
are executed, ensuring that jobs behave predictably and efficiently. They enable
workflow maintainers to control the flow of the workflow by specifying prerequi-
sites that must be met before a job runs (if), determining the sequence in which
jobs are executed (needs), and managing error handling strategies (continue-on-
error). Execution rules also allow for time constraints on jobs or steps, which
can prevent indefinite runs and ensure that resources are managed effectively
(timeout-minutes). Only 3.9% of all observed changes were related to entities in
this concept. The low frequency of changes can be attributed to the reduced
need for such conditions in simpler scenarios.
    Formatting (F) corresponds to cosmetic changes that do not affect a work-
flow’s execution. This includes cases like changing the list representation of a
workflow trigger, changes to delimiters, and quotation styles (e.g., replacing sin-
gle by double quotes). Changes in formatting were observed very infrequently
(2.5% of all observed changes).

 Takeaways.     1,109 individual workflow changes across 439 commits were
 manually classified into 3 change types and 7 concept categories. The most
 frequent change type was modification of workflow entities (53.4%), followed
 by addition (28.5%) and removal (18.1%). The large majority of workflow
 changes (81.8%) fall into three concept categories: task specification (39.8%),
 task configuration (23.9%), and documentation (18.1%). The first two con-
 cepts suggest that maintainers mainly change workflow configurations to
 refine or extend its functionality. Less frequent changes involve runtime
 configuration (7.6%), execution triggers (4.2%), execution rules (3.9%), and
 formatting (2.5%), which tend to be defined early in a workflow’s lifecycle
 and remain stable over time.

    The previous analysis focused on changes to individual workflow files. How-
ever, some GitHub repositories contain multiple workflow files that may be
changed within the same commit. In our sample of 439 commits, 95 of them
(21.64%) touched multiple workflow files. We performed an in-depth analysis
of those 95 multi-workflow commits to identify the nature of their changes. We
found 23 cases of unrelated changes where no relation could be discerned be-
tween the changes to each workflow, 68 commits with co-changes where the
same kind of change was made to each workflow, and 4 commits with depen-
dent changes where a change to some workflow was the natural consequence of


                                        20
a different change to another. The commits with dependent changes involved
moving a job or steps from one workflow to another, splitting a workflow into
two, and refactoring jobs into a reusable workflow. 31 of the 68 commits with
co-changes involved updating the version of reused components, either manu-
ally (13 commits) or automatically (18 commits) via tools such as Dependabot
or Renovate. The 37 remaining co-change commits applied the same change to
multiple workflow files (changing branch name, updating run or updating the
matrix strategy).

 Takeaways. Most of the multi-workflow changes (68 out of 95) apply similar
 changes to multiple workflows. As a consequence, the quantitative analysis
 in the remaining RQs will focus on changes to individual workflows only.



6. RQ3: What types of changes are made to workflows?
     RQ2 reported on a manual qualitative classification of workflow changes
into seven different concepts. Each concept encompasses multiple syntactic
entities, corresponding to specific workflow keys. RQ3 shifts the focus toward a
quantitative perspective aimed at analysing the number and type of changes
made inside workflows (i.e., addition, modification and removal), whereas RQ4
will focus on the frequency of changing specific syntactic entities. In RQ3, we
are particularly interested in understanding whether developers tend to create
small changes (e.g., modifying a single step) or larger ones (e.g., modifying
multiple steps, adding new steps, etc.). This distinction provides insights in how
developers approach workflow maintenance, particularly whether their changes
are focused on small refinements or involve more complex updates that may
require significant restructuring.
     Answering both RQ3 and RQ4 requires a tool to compute the changeset of
syntactic differences between a modified workflow file and its immediate prede-
cessor. To do so, we rely on gawd (GitHub Actions Workflow Differ), a Python-
based tool that identifies changes made to workflow files [50]. gawd computes
the complete set of changes that can be observed between two workflow files
provided as input. The tool detects addition and removal of workflow entities,
modification of the value of an entity, moving the position of a step in jobs,
and renaming jobs (i.e., when the job key is changed). For each of these change
types, gawd provides the corresponding paths and values from the two workflow
files. An example of changeset provided by gawd for a workflow file and its
immediate predecessor is shown in Fig. 7.
     We executed gawd on all modified workflow file snapshots and their immedi-
ate predecessors in our dataset. This resulted in 2,261,806 changesets containing
a total of 7,811,892 changes. The number of changesets is lower than the num-
ber of modified workflow files (2,330,529 cases, see RQ1), since gawd excludes
changes that are irrelevant for our analysis, such as adding or removing whites-
paces, comments, etc. The dataset of changes and changesets created in this
process is available through our replication package.


                                       21
1   renamed jobs . main to jobs . main - task
2   added env with { ’ REGISTRY ’: ’ ghcr . io ’ , ’ IMAGE_NAME ’: ’$ {{ github .
        ,→ repository }} ’}
3   moved jobs . main . steps [5] to jobs . main - task . steps [6]
4   changed jobs . main . steps [5]. with . push from " $ {{ github . repository ==
        ,→ ’ cloud - hypervisor / rust - hypervisor - firmware ’ && github .
        ,→ event_name == ’ push ’ }}" to " $ {{ github . event_name == ’ push ’
        ,→ }}"
5   changed jobs . main . steps [5]. with . tags from ’ r u s t h y p e r v i s o r f i r m w a r e /
        ,→ dev : latest ’ to ’$ {{ steps . meta . outputs . tags }} ’
6   removed jobs . main . steps [4]. if with " $ {{ github . repository == ’ cloud
        ,→ - hypervisor / rust - hypervisor - firmware ’ && github . event_name
        ,→ == ’ push ’ }}"
7   added jobs . main - task . steps [4]. with . registry with ’$ {{ env . REGISTRY
        ,→ }} ’
8   removed jobs . main . steps [6] with { ’ name ’: ’ Image digest ’ , ’run ’: ’
        ,→ echo $ {{ steps . docker_build . outputs . digest }} ’}
9   added jobs . main - task . steps [5] with { ’ name ’: ’ Extract metadata ( tags
        ,→ , labels ) for Docker ’ , ’id ’: ’ meta ’ , ’ uses ’: ’ docker /
        ,→ metadata - action@v4 ’ , ’ with ’: { ’ images ’: ’$ {{ env . REGISTRY
        ,→ }}/ $ {{ env . IMAGE_NAME }} ’ , ’ flavor ’: ’ latest = true \n ’}}


    Figure 7: Example of a changeset of syntactic differences computed by gawd on a modi-
    fied workflow file and its predecessor, taken from the popular repository cloud-hypervisor/
    rust-hypervisor-firmware.


        The 7,811,892 changes can be broken down into 3,551,083 modifications,
    1,513,588 additions, 887,961 removals, 1,811,068 moves, and 48,192 renames. We
    ignore the move and rename change types because they are of little relevance
    for our analysis and because gawd only provides a partial view of them. For
    instance, gawd only detects renames of jobs while moves are only detected inside
    the list of steps.
        The number of changes (5,952,632 after ignoring renames and moves) is 2.67
    times higher than the number of changesets (2,226,452) because many change-
    sets contain more than a single change. Still, the median number of changes
    per changeset is one, implying that at least half of all changesets involve only a
    single change. Fig. 8 visualises the distribution of changes per changeset. We
    observe that most changesets are small and focused, with a steep decline in the
    frequency of larger changesets. We also observe a group of changesets that con-
    tain disproportionately many changes. Indeed, 10% of changesets include more
    than five changes, and nearly 4% contain ten or more changes, with a maximum
    of 1,596 changes observed in some changeset. Such outliers are typically the
    result of workflow files being modified by automated tools. 9
        Further looking at the change types in these changesets, we found that
    78.98% of all the changesets contain only one change type, with modifications
    being the most common (78.81%), followed by additions (15.79%) and removals


      9 Example: https://tinyurl.com/3xcjtude




                                                   22
                                                         0.5

                              Proportion of changesets   0.4
                                                         0.3
                                                         0.2
                                                         0.1
                                                         0.0
                                                                 1     2     3      4      5     6       7    8      9 10-max
                                                                            Number of changes in changeset
  Figure 8: Histogram of the proportion of changesets in function of number of changes.

                              1.0
   Proportion of changesets




                              0.8

                              0.6

                              0.4

                              0.2

                              0.0
                                                          2020        2021          2022          2023        2024           2025
                                                                     addition + modification + removal       only removal
                                                                     addition + removal                      only addition
                                                                     modification + removal                  only modification
                                                                     modification + addition

Figure 9: Weekly evolution of the proportion of changesets in function of the change types.


(5.40%). The remaining 21.02% of changesets involve multiple change types.
The most frequent combination of change types is addition and modification
(37.43% of multi-type changesets). Other common combinations include all
three change types together (28.40%), addition and removal (20.10%), and mod-
ification and removal (14.05%).
     To analyze how these trends evolve over time, we examined the proportion
of changesets containing at least one instance of each change type on a weekly
basis. Fig. 9 reveals a growing dominance of changesets consisting solely of
modifications, indicating that as workflows mature, developers focus more on
refining configurations than on adding or removing elements. At the end of the
observation period, modifications account for 51.29% of monthly changesets on
average, compared to 15.6% for additions and 4.89% for removals. Multi-type


                                                                                          23
changesets continue to remain relevant as well. This suggests that, while most
changes are focused on refining workflows, a significant portion still involves
more complex changes combining multiple types, reflecting an ongoing balance
between workflow maintenance activities and functional enhancements.
    We also observe two relative spikes in modification activity, one in the first
quarter of 2022 and another in the third quarter of 2023, aligned with major
events in the GitHub Actions ecosystem. The 2022 spike corresponds to the mi-
gration from node12 to node16, coinciding with the release of version 3 of several
widely used Actions, including checkout10 , setup-node11 , setup-python12 , and
cache.13 These Actions are among the most frequently used in workflows, as
previously reported by Decan et al. [11]. Similarly, the spike in 2023 can be
attributed to planned deprecations, such as the phase-out of Ubuntu 18.04 and
the removal of Python 2.x support in version 3 of setup-python, which prompted
widespread updates to existing workflows.

 Takeaways. We analyzed 2,261,806 workflow file changesets, comprising a
 total of 7,811,892 individual changes obtained through gawd , composed of
 additions, removals and modifications of workflow entities. We observed that
 nearly four out of five changesets (78.98%) belong to a single change type,
 and in nearly four out of five cases (78.81%) these are modifications. The
 proportion of changesets consisting exclusively of modifications tends to grow
 over time, suggesting an increased focus on refining existing workflows.

    To assess the possible impact of LLM coding tools on the changes made to
the contents of workflows, we apply the same analytical procedure as in RQ1.
Specifically, we compare the change frequency of early-phase and later -phase
workflow histories between the before and after period of our dataset (see Fig. 6),
measuring change frequency for the five change types to workflow entities: mod-
ification, addition, removal, move, and renaming. H0 is only rejected for the
modification change type, for both early-phase and later -phase workflow histo-
ries, and for the addition change type only for early-phase but the effect sizes
are negligible (δ < 0.147) reflecting a decreased change frequency in the after
period. As a consequence, this fine-grained comparative analysis at the level of
change types to workflow entities again does not reveal any conclusive impact
of the use of LLM coding tools.

 Takeaways. There is little to no evidence that the introduction of LLM cod-
 ing tools or other major technological changes have impacted the frequency
 of fine-grained changes to workflow entities.



 10 https://github.com/actions/checkout/releases/tag/v3.0.0
 11 https://github.com/actions/setup-node/releases/tag/v3.0.0
 12 https://github.com/actions/setup-python/releases/tag/v3.0.0
 13 https://github.com/actions/cache/releases/tag/v3.0.0




                                        24
7. RQ4: Which syntactic entities are frequently changed in work-
   flows?

    Continuing the quantitative analysis of RQ3, RQ4 takes a finer-grained per-
spective by focusing on the syntactic changes made to workflows. By doing so,
we aim to uncover which workflow entities are most frequently changed. Under-
standing these syntactic hotspots can guide future improvements to the work-
flow language and its supporting tools. Frequently changed entities are prime
candidates for enhanced tool support, such as automated bug detection, refac-
toring, and security audits, while infrequently changed entities may pinpoint
low usage, limited usefulness, or lack of awareness, pointing to opportunities for
clearer language documentation or redesign.
    To identify the workflow entities that are most frequently changed, we rely on
the workflow paths extracted using gawd (cf. RQ3). These paths represent the
hierarchical structure of the modified workflow entities (e.g., jobs.build.steps.3.if:always()).
To uncover common patterns across workflows, we normalize these paths as fol-
lows: (1) we replace user-defined identifiers (such as job names) with generic
placeholders (e.g., replacing jobs.build by jobs.<id>); and (2) we mask the posi-
tion of elements within arrays or lists (e.g., replacing steps.3 by steps.<nr>). For
example, the path jobs.build.steps.3.if is normalized to jobs.<id>.steps.<nr>.if.
These normalisations enables the abstraction of change paths that are syntac-
tically different but semantically equivalent across workflows. This abstraction
allows to group changes by their structural role within the workflow, such as
jobs or steps, even when they differ in names or positions, enabling a better
comparison across workflows.
    Applying this normalization process to the changed workflows in our dataset,
we obtain 198 unique normalized paths, reflect all syntactic workflow entities
that have been subject to changes. We organize these paths into a tree struc-
ture that mirrors the nested key organization of YAML syntax: each tree node
represents an entity (e.g., jobs, steps, permissions), and child nodes represent
increasingly specific sub-entities. The root of the tree represents the conceptual
structure of a complete workflow file, aggregated across all workflows. For each
tree node, we compute the proportion of changes it accounts for by summing
the counts from all corresponding subpaths. This hierarchical view enables a
structured analysis of how changes are distributed across different workflow en-
tities.
    Table 3 presents the most frequently changed paths within this hierarchy.
For clarity and interpretability, paths are grouped based on shared structural
prefixes. Each table entry thus represents a category of syntactic entities sharing
a common prefix (e.g., jobs.<id>.steps.<nr>.if), capturing all changes affecting
any sub-element within that subtree of the configuration. We only include the
paths that cumulatively account for at least 0.2% of all observed changes.
    For each path, we report the proportion of changes associated with it rela-
tive to the total number of changes in the dataset. This metric illustrates how
frequently modifications occur at that specific location in the workflow struc-
ture. Additionally, the table indicates the most common change types (i.e.,


                                          25
Table 3: Relative frequency of changed workflow paths, alongside their primary change type
(Addition, Modification, Removal) and concept (using the shortcuts introduced in Table 2.)
      entity                      % changes     primary change type        Concept
      jobs/<id>                        91.05    M (62.0%)                 TS
         steps[<nr>]                   70.10    M (69.2%)                 TS
            uses                       22.40    M (99.8%)                 TC, TS
            run                        12.99    M (99.7%)                 TS
            with                       12.65    M (64.8%)                 TC
            name                        3.27    M (87.5%)                 D
            env                         2.29    A (48.4%), R (26.7%)      RC
            if                          2.09    M (55.2%)                 ER
            id                          0.34    M (43.2%), A (40.7%)      TC
            working-directory           0.28    M (50.2%)                 TC
         strategy                       9.89    A (37.6%), M (34.6%)      TS
            matrix                      9.52    A (36.3%), M (35.8%)      TS
               include                  2.88    M (48.3%), A (31.4%)      TS
               exclude                  0.47    A (44.7%), R (29.4%)      TS
         runs-on                        1.47    A (2.2%), M (95.9%)       RC
         needs                          1.08    A (46.9%), R (28.1%)      ER
         env                            1.05    A (41.5%), M (33.1%)      RC
         if                             0.95    M (47.8%), A (38.7%)      ER
         name                           0.79    M (79.9%)                 D
         with                           0.72    M (50.3%)                 TC
         container                      0.43    M (82.2%)                 TS
         uses                           0.36    M (99.5%)                 EC
         permissions                    0.35    A (81.6%)                 RC
         timeout-minutes                0.25    A (58.2%)                 ER
         outputs                        0.24    A (54.9%)                 TC
      on                                5.86    A (47.0%), M (28.1%)      ET
         push                           2.22    A (45.2%), R (29.2%)      ET
         pull_request                   1.62    A (49.6%), R (25.6%)      ET
         schedule                       0.54    M (73.8%)                 ET
         workflow_call                  0.31    A (54.8%)                 ET
      env                               1.48    M (47.9%), A (33.5%)      RC
      name                              0.81    M (96.8%)                 D
      permissions                       0.45    A (81.6%)                 RC
      concurrency                       0.29    A (68.7%)                 ER




Modification, Addition, or Removal) observed at each path. If a single change
type constitutes more than 50% of the changes at that path, it is labeled as
the primary change type. Otherwise, the two most frequent change types are
reported. This breakdown reveals which parts of the workflow tree structure
are more actively changed and in which way.

Change concepts. Below, we report on the most frequent path changes in
workflows, grouped by the workflow concepts of RQ2 (cf. Table 2).
    Task Configuration (TC). The most frequently changed paths belong to the
workflow jobs (91.05%), and more specifically their steps (70.10%). Within steps,
the most common changes involve the run execution commands, and the uses
and with entities that reference Actions and their parameters. Notably, nearly
all observed changes to run and uses are modifications (over 99%). For uses,


                                           26
these modifications correspond to Action version updates to maintain work-
flow stability by keeping dependencies up to date. Similarly, with is frequently
modified (64.8%), reflecting the need to adjust Action parameters as workflows
evolve.
    Task Specification (TS). Frequently changed paths belonging to this concept
relate to the matrix strategy (9.89%), primarily for the matrix and include en-
tities that tend to be changed through a mix of additions and modifications,
whereas for exclude removals are more common than modifications. This pat-
tern indicates that while matrix configurations are frequently expanded or ad-
justed, exclusions are more often cleaned up or removed entirely. Changes to
the uses entity that involve replacing a referenced Action (rather than updat-
ing its version) are also classified under the concept of Task Specification, as
they correspond to changing the workflow logic by altering what task is being
executed rather than how it is configured.
    Execution Triggers (ET). The most frequently changed workflow triggers
are push and pull_request. They are used to initiate workflows in response to
making a pull request or commit to the repository. For execution triggers, the
primary change type is addition, followed by a smaller number of modifications.
    Runtime Configuration (RC). Environment variables (env) in workflows, jobs
or steps are changed relatively frequently, mostly through addition or modifi-
cation. The permissions, which are used to give fine-grained control over what
workflows and jobs can access, are changed less frequently and mostly involved
adding more fine-grained permissions.
    Documentation (D). Relatively frequent modfications are observed to the
name of workflows, jobs or steps, indicating that developers often change the
names of these entities to maintain workflow readability.
    Execution Rules (ER). The most frequently changed entity for this concept is
if (2.09% at step level and 0.95% at job level), used for the conditional execution
of jobs or steps. Its primary change type is modification, reflecting adjustments
made to match evolving execution conditions.
 Takeaways. The top ten modified workflow paths account for nearly 80%
 of all changes, mostly in the jobs, particularly within steps. The most fre-
 quently changed workflow entities (run, used and with) map closely to the
 Task Configuration concept.

     The remainder of this section dives deeper into the observed evolution of spe-
cific workflow entities, and discusses the impact of such changes on the security
and reusability of workflows.
Usage of automated tools for workflow maintenance. Table 3 revealed
that uses is the most frequently modified workflow entity. The manual analysis
of RQ2 revealed that many of these changes are in fact version updates of
reusable Actions or other versioned workflow entities. We verified this on the
full dataset of RQ4, observing a frequent use of automated dependency update
tools, identified based on commit authors associated with bots. GitHub’s built-
in Dependabot was found to be used in 69.2% of all workflow histories, and the


                                        27
third-party tool Renovate in 21.0% of them. They are primarily updating Action
versions in the uses entity, accounting for 562,093 of the 587,624 modifications
involving version updates.
We also dived deeper in the kind of Action version updates proposed by these
tools. GHA supports four version formats: fully specified version tags (e.g.,
v5.0.1), major-only version tags (e.g., v5), commit hashes (e.g., 8f4b7f8. . . ), and
branches (e.g., main). GitHub recommends commit hashes as the most secure
option, since they allow for immutable version pinning. For version tags, GitHub
recommends fully specified versions over major-only versions. Our workflow his-
tory analysis revealed an encouraging trend towards more secure version usage,
with a decrease in version tag usage by 7,112 cases, and an increase in com-
mit hashes by 7,235, nearly catching up in absolute numbers (239k vs. 242k).
The version tags also shifted towards the more secure option of fully specified
versions with an increase of 1,434 cases, compared to a decrease of 667 cases
for major-only tags. Fully specified versions have now become as common as
major-only tags (120K vs. 121K). These results highlight the wide adoption of
dependency automation tools, contributing to more secure workflow practices.
Modifying workflow permissions. As another way to increase workflow
security, GHA provides the permissions mechanism to give fine-grained control
over what workflows and jobs can access. Introduced in April 2021, they allow
to enforce the principle of least privilege. While changes to permissions represent
a small fraction of the observed workflow changes (cf. Table 3), we observed
an notable increase in the number of additions of permissions at workflow level
(26,410) as well as at job level (25,708). The most frequently added permission
type at workflow level was contents:read, whereas a wider variety of permissions
were observed at job level (e.g., contents:write, id-token:write, pull-requests:write).
These additive permission changes suggest that workflows start with default
permissions that get refined gradually as the workflow evolves.
Tradeoff between control and reusability. The analysis in this section
revealed that the most frequently changed workflow entities are steps, mostly
within the uses and run specifications. During the manual analysis of RQ2 we
observed multiple replacements of run by uses or vice versa. Analysing the full
dataset of RQ4, we observed 9,827 cases of replacing run by uses, reflecting a shift
toward exploiting reusable Actions. Doing so promotes workflow modularity
and maintainability, but can come with increased security risks [34]. We also
observed 7,230 cases of replacing uses by run, reflecting a preference for using
custom scripts to enable more fine-grained control, performance optimisation,
and avoidance of untrusted dependencies.




                                          28
 Takeaways. An in-depth analysis of the syntactic change patterns in work-
 flows reveals that: (i) automated tools play a major role in maintaining
 workflows, especially to keep versions up to date; (ii) there is a trend to-
 wards more precise version pinning, enhancing workflow reliability and re-
 producibility. (iii) workflows tend to improve upon security best practices
 (such as respecting the principle of least privilege and the use of commit
 hashes for Action versioning) even though there is still significant room for
 improvement; (iv) workflow maintainers make trade-offs between modularity
 (though the use of reusable Actions) and fine-grained control (through the
 reliance on custom scripts).



8. Discussion

    In this section, we compare our findings with existing research on the evolu-
tion and maintenance of CI/CD configuration files. Each subsection corresponds
to one or more of our research questions, providing a focused discussion of how
our results align with, extend, or differ from prior work. Section 8.1 discusses
workflow file evolution patterns (RQ1), Section 8.2 addresses conceptual changes
observed in workflows (RQ2), Section 8.3 examines the changes on the content
of workflow files (RQ3 and RQ4) and compare those findings with prior studies.

8.1. CI/CD configuration file evolution patterns
     This subsection compares the results of RQ1 to prior research. Our analysis
over 267K+ workflow change histories revealed that roughly 7% of workflow files
are modified each week, with a median of 82 days between successive updates.
Modifications to workflow files clearly dominate over file additions, removals and
renamings. One out of four repositories add more than one workflow file (with
a median of three) during their lifetime, and removals tend to occur shortly
after their creation. These results indicate that GitHub Actions workflows are
undergoing a continued maintenance practice rather than a one-time setup.
     Prior studies of CI/CD configuration evolution reported similar yet less pro-
nounced trends. Hilton et al. [8] investigated how often developers evolve their
CI configurations by analysing the full history of .travis.yml files across 34,544
GitHub repositories. They reported a median of 12 configuration changes per
repository, with 25% of them making five or fewer changes, suggesting that most
teams follow a “set up once and adjust occasionally” pattern, while a minority
frequently revise their CI setups. In comparison, our analysis of GitHub Ac-
tions workflows revealed a more active evolution pattern, with a median of 22
workflow file changes per repository, with 14% of them making five or fewer
changes.
     Zampetti et al. [16] studied the evolution of 4,644 GitHub repositories, show-
ing that Jenkins CI/CD configuration files typically change less often than pro-
duction or test code but still undergo several updates throughout a repository’s
lifetime. The median number of commits impacting Jenkins configuration files


                                        29
is 20, and 10% of the studied repositories have more than 100 such commits.
In comparison, we found a median of 22 commits impacting GitHub Actions
configuration files, with 10% of the repositories having more than 121 commits.
     The above observations suggest a slightly higher modification frequency for
GitHub Actions workflows than for other types of CI/CD configuration files.
     We are not aware of any prior research having statistically studied the po-
tential impact of LLM-based coding agents (such as Copilot) on the evolution
patterns of CI/CD configuration files. This is unsurprising, given their relative
recency and the many perils that need to be overcome to reliably detect their
presence, use and evolution in GitHub repositories [51]. The peril of partial
observability states that coding agents only leave partial traces of their activity
(if at all). The perils of agent diversity and multiplicity state that different
agents may work quite differently and hence may leave traces in very different
ways. Finally, the peril of high velocity implies that the way agents function and
are being used changes very rapidly. Because of this, quantifying the impact of
LLM-based agents on specific development practices is very challenging. In this
paper, we conducted a before-after analysis to try to detect whether their intro-
duction had any significant impact on the change frequency of GitHub Actions
workflow commits, but we observed only negligible effects at best. Further work
at a more fine-grained level, based on the mitigation heuristics proposed in [51],
would be needed to study any positive or negative impact of the introduction
and use of specific LLM-based tools, either during the early phase or sustained
lifetime of workflow configuration files.

8.2. Conceptual changes in workflows
    In RQ2 we manually analysed and classified 439 distinct workflow changes
into seven concept categories. The results indicated that changes to GitHub Ac-
tions workflows predominantly focus on task specification and task configuration,
mirroring developers’ emphasis on refining execution logic and adjusting the pa-
rameters of reusable Action components. Earlier studies reported similar high-
level categories for other CI/CD services such as Travis and Jenkins [9, 15, 16].
For instance, the “build logic” category of [9, 15, 16] corresponds to our task
specification concept, their “environment configuration” to our runtime configu-
ration concept, and their “documentation” category to our documentation con-
cept. This overlap demonstrates that GHA workflow maintenance is similar in
nature to maintaining workflows or pipelines for other CI/CD services, though
expressed through different syntactic constructs.
    We also analysed to what extent commits modify multiple workflow files si-
multaneously and what was the nature of these changes. The majority of the
identified cases (68 out of 95) consisted of the same kind of change being made to
multiple workflows, mostly for shallow routine maintenance-oriented activities.
While some of these activities (e.g. dependency updates) were automated via
tools, we suspect that many other co-changes were actually performed manually.
This provides an opportunity for tool builders to better support cross-workflow
maintenance beyond dependency automation. For researchers, the presence of
cross-workflow changes provides an opportunity to shift attention from studying


                                        30
isolated workflows to more ecosystem-wide studies of workflow changes, not only
within individual commits, but even across different repositories. As an illus-
tration of such research, Cardoen et al. [52] empirically analysed the prevalence
of duplication within workflow files, but also across workflow files belonging to
different repositories.

8.3. Evolution of workflow contents
     RQ3 and RQ4 jointly investigated how the contents of individual workflow
files evolve by analysing what kinds of changes (addition, removal, or modi-
fication) are made and which workflow entities are most frequently affected.
RQ3 identified 7.8M+ individual changes across all workflow histories, including
3.5M+ modifications, 1.5M+ additions, 887K+ removals, and 48K+ renames.
Nearly four out of five changesets (78.98%) consist of a single change type,
most often modifications (78.81%). This share grows over time, suggesting that
workflow evolution is dominated by incremental refinements rather than major
restructuring. These quantitative results indicate that most workflows evolve
through continuous adjustments rather than complete redesigns, mirroring ear-
lier findings for other CI/CDs such as Travis and Jenkins [8, 16, 53]. We also
statistically analysed possible effects of evolving technology (such as the intro-
duction and use of LLM-based coding tools) on the frequency of changes to work-
flow entities, but we observed only negligible differences in change frequency for
modifications to workflow entities. As already mentioned in Section 8.1, more
fine-grained future research would be needed to study other possible effects,
taking into account the many perils and pitfalls that come with such analysis
[51].
     RQ4 examined the distribution of changes across workflow entities, observ-
ing that nearly 80% of all changes occur in the jobs section, particularly within
steps. Most of these correspond to task configuration activities (uses, run, and
with). A deeper examination of the uses entity revealed distinct maintenance
strategies. Among 1.3M+ changes to this entity, 85.2% correspond to Action
version updates, while 14.8% involve replacing the Action entirely. Such re-
placements arise when existing Actions become outdated, deprecated, or un-
maintained, consistent with prior reports on ecosystem health and developer
abandonment [54, 55, 56]. Some of these Action replacements also aim to im-
prove performance or optimise execution, similar to the optimisation opportuni-
ties identified by Bouzenia et al. [57]. For example, we found cases of workflows
replacing actions/download-artifact with actions/cache to improve efficiency, or
migrate from deprecated Actions (such as ghaction-docker-buildx which has been
created and maintained by community) to officially supported ones by docker
organisation. Another type of change relates to replacing the uses entity by the
run entity to gain finer control and reduce dependency risks, or vice versa to
increase workflow modularity. This duality reflects broader maintenance trade-
offs between reusability and autonomy.
     We observed a trend towards improved workflow security to reduce the
GitHub Actions attack surface, through an increase in the use of permissions
to enforce the principle of least privilege, the extensive use of automated tools


                                       31
(such as Dependabot and Renovate) to keep versions up to date, and the in-
creased use of commit-hash version pinning to secure Action versioning. While
prior research reported limited use of Action version pinning (only 1.6% in [11]),
our findings indicating a growing tendency toward secure versioning practices
since nearly half of all Action version updates employ commit hashes. How-
ever, this observation is based on workflow changes rather than on the overall
population of workflows, thus, the increased proportion of commit-hash updates
could reflect more frequent updates within a subset of workflows rather than
widespread adoption across all repositories. Our observations about increased
use of dependency automation tools for workflows aligns with prior findings that
projects relying on such tools reduce their exposure to security issues and tech-
nical debt [58]. With respect to the use of permissions, automated tools such
as StepSecurity14 could help to further enforce the principle of least privilege,
but remain underexploited. These results align with broader observations on
the evolving maturity of the GHA ecosystem [59], in which maintainers progres-
sively balance reuse, security, and organizational consistency.
    In summary, the analyses of RQ3 and RQ4 portray the continuous evolution
of GitHub Actions workflows to satisfy diverse needs. Workflows evolve through
incremental modifications, focused on dependency management, configuration
refinement, and security improvements, rather than large-scale redesign. Future
work could further contextualize these findings by linking workflow change his-
tories with execution logs, such as those proposed by Moriconi et al. [60], and
enriched metadata such as commit messages or issue references, enabling a more
comprehensive understanding of how workflows evolve in response to runtime
outcomes, errors, and developer intent.


9. Threats to Validity

    We follow the structure recommended by Wohlin et al. [61] to discuss possible
threats to validity of our research.
    Construct validity concerns the relation between the theory behind the
experiment and the observed findings. The dataset of workflow files we used
identified the presence of workflow files by detecting (valid) YAML files within
the designated .github/workflows directory. As a consequence, it may be the
case that some workflows in this dataset were not actively used (i.e., never trig-
gered for execution) or were not even intended to be used. We expect this to
be the case for a limited number of workflows, since the process of writing a
workflow file and placing it in the appropriate directory is a deliberate action
taken by developers. Moreover, since changes to workflow files reflect devel-
oper effort and intent, the effort of maintaining workflow files remain valuable
independently of whether the workflow is actively being used or not.
    A second threat arises from our decision to exclude workflow histories con-
taining invalid workflow files, as explained in Section 3.2. We did so in order to

 14 https://www.stepsecurity.io




                                       32
ensure quality and syntactic correctness of the data under scrutiny. This led to
the exclusion of 11.54% of all workflow files histories. Those workflow histories
may exhibit a different change patterns compared to valid workflow files, par-
ticularly in terms of debugging. However, there is no evidence that this would
be the case.
    A third threat relates to the fact that we only considered the primary branch
of each repository when detecting workflow file changes, excluding changes oc-
curring in parallel branches. While this prevented us from studying fine-grained
changes in parallel branches, we argue that this is not a significant threat to our
study. Indeed, the primary branch is typically the most active one, reflecting
the development state of the repository. Additionally, changes made in parallel
branches are usually merged back into the primary branch or discarded, meaning
that the primary branch will eventually reflect all changes made in the reposi-
tory. The main bias related to this threat stems in how changes are merged from
parallel branches to the primary branch: changes from parallel branches can be
merged with a squashing strategy, implying that multiple distinct changes are
combined into one large changeset, potentially altering the observed evolution
patterns. Unfortunately, there is no way to detect whether a squashing strat-
egy was used or not, as the git history does not retain information about the
merging strategy [62].
    Internal validity relates to the extent to which the study results are influ-
enced by the experimental treatment or condition being studied. One such treat
is related to the gawd tool we used for analyzing workflow file changes. The
tool can be parameterised in many ways to detect different types of changes
in workflow files. We relied on gawd ’s default configuration for our analysis,
but other settings might produce different results. To mitigate this threat, we
manually checked the results of gawd on a small sample of workflow file changes
to ensure that the default configuration was appropriate for our study.
    Conclusion validity concerns the degree to which reasonable conclusions
have been derived from our analysis. The qualitative analysis in RQ2 was based
on a manual analysis of a limited number of workflow files, potentially leading
to an incomplete classification of change concepts. We mitigated this threat
by analysing workflow file changes until saturation was reached, ensuring no
new change types were emerging. Another potential threat to conclusion valid-
ity arises from the subjective interpretation of changes in workflow files. This
subjectivity could lead to misclassification or biased analysis of the observed
changes, potentially impacting the reliability of our findings. To mitigate this
risk, we followed the well-established framework method [46] to guarantee a
structured and systematic qualitative analysis. Additionally, we involved mul-
tiple researchers in the process to cross-verify interpretations, thereby reducing
the likelihood of individual biases and ensuring a more robust understanding
of the data. Finally, the qualitative findings from RQ2 were triangulated with
quantitative results in RQ4, further supporting the validity of our conclusions.
    External validity concerns the generalisability of the results beyond the
specific data being analysed. The dataset we relied on to conduct our study is
based on active GitHub repositories (i.e., those that had at least one commit


                                        33
since October 2024), that have at least 300 stars and 300 commits. The ratio-
nale behind these criteria is to exclude repositories that are not representative
of typical software development practices, such as abandoned, personal, or ex-
perimental repositories [63]. While we share the rationale behind these criteria,
it is important to note that our findings may not be generalisable to smaller or
less active repositories that may employ workflows for different purposes, such
as publishing GitHub Pages or managing personal projects. Consequently, the
applicability of our conclusions to these contexts remains uncertain.


10. Conclusion

    This article presented a mixed-methods empirical study of how GitHub Ac-
tions workflows evolve over time. We examined how workflows change through-
out their lifetime, which conceptual areas are most affected, and which syntactic
entities are most frequently modified.
    The qualitative part of the analysis involved a manual investigation of 1,109
distinct changes across 439 workflows. We clustered these changes along three
change types (modification, addition and removal) into seven conceptual cat-
egories. Modifications were the most frequent, and the changes primarily be-
longed to the concepts of task specification and task configuration. We also
observed that commits that change multiple workflows are not uncommon, but
mostly correspond to routine maintenance-oriented activities that make the
same kind of change to multiple workflows.
    The quantitative part of the analysis relied on a large dataset of 267,955
workflow histories, encompassing 3,418,911 distinct workflow files across 49,258
repositories over a period of six years. Around one out of four repositories added
more than one workflow file during their lifetime. Workflow files were updated
on average every 159 days, with about 7% of all workflows being modified every
week. The dominant change type was modifications to the workflow contents.
We also observed bursts of consecutive workflow commits, reflecting iterative
debugging and trial-and-error maintenance behaviour. We analysed whether
the workflow change frequency or burst behaviour differed between the period
before and after major technological changes in GitHub (such as the emergence
of LLM-based coding tools like Copilot), but could not find any conclusive
evidence.
    An automated analysis of workflow diffs revealed that the large majority of
changesets consists of modifications as the only change type. Such modification-
only changesets become increasingly dominant over time, suggesting that most
projects change their workflow configurations iteratively. Delving into these
workflow modifications, we observed that nearly 80% of them are concentrated
in only ten workflow paths. The majority of them involve changes in the work-
flow jobs, and more specifically their steps. Such changes map directly to the
concepts of task specification and task configuration.
    Automated tools were found to play an important and growing role in work-
flow maintenance. Dependency version update tools account for roughly one


                                       34
out of five workflow changesets. Moreover, there is an increasing trend towards
safer versioning practices and more fine-grained permission control.
    In summary, we have shown that GitHub Actions workflows are dynamically
maintained software configuration components that evolve continuously through
iterative, fine-grained maintenance. Yet, several promising future directions re-
main. A key research opportunity is to study the co-evolution of workflow
configurations and their execution behavior. Workflow changes are likely driven
by performance, reliability, or dependency issues. Moreover, enhancing work-
flow functionality often requires iterative trial-and-error processes. Empirical
analyses of datasets combining workflow histories, execution logs, and commit
messages could reveal deeper insights into the motivations and consequences
of workflow evolution. Another research avenue is to advance tool support
for workflow maintenance beyond mere dependency management. Developers
could benefit from intelligent tools to detect workflow smells, assist debugging
and testing, detect and fix vulnerabilities, and recommend improvements tai-
lored to repository context and maintainer needs. Evaluating the effectiveness
of these tools through empirical studies could further bridge the gap between
workflow engineering and practical automation. A final untapped opportunity
consists of understanding and quantifying the fine-grained impact on workflow
maintenance of the introduction and use of specific AI-based agents, either dur-
ing the early phase or sustained lifetime of workflow configurations, considering
the perils and mitigation heuristics proposed by Robbes et al. [51].

Acknowledgments
    This work is supported by the ARC-21/25 UMONS3 Action de Recherche
Concertée financée par le Ministère de la Communauté française - Direction
générale de l’Enseignement non obligatoire et de la Recherche scientifique, and
by the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique - FNRS under grant numbers T.0149.22,
F.4515.23 and J.0147.24.

References
 [1] P. M. Duvall, S. Matyas, A. Glover, Continuous integration: Improving
     software quality and reducing risk, Pearson Education, 2007.
 [2] A. Shahin, M. Babar, L. Zhu, Continuous integration, delivery and deploy-
     ment: A systematic review on approaches, tools, challenges and practices,
     IEEE Access 5 (2017) 3909–3943.
 [3] M. Wessel, T. Mens, A. Decan, P. Rostami Mazrae, The GitHub develop-
     ment workflow automation ecosystems, in: Software Ecosystems: Tooling
     and Analytics, Springer, 2023.
 [4] T. Savor, M. Douglas, M. Gentili, L. Williams, K. Beck, M. Stumm, Con-
     tinuous deployment at Facebook and OANDA, in: International Conference
     on Software Engineering (ICSE), IEEE, 2016, pp. 21–30.


                                       35
 [5] K. Beck, Extreme Programming explained: Embrace change, Addison-
     Wesley Professional, 2000.
 [6] P. Rostami Mazrae, T. Mens, M. Golzadeh, A. Decan, On the usage, co-
     usage and migration of CI/CD tools: A qualitative analysis, Empirical
     Software Engineering 28 (2) (2023) 52.

 [7] B. Vasilescu, Y. Yu, H. Wang, P. Devanbu, V. Filkov, Quality and pro-
     ductivity outcomes relating to continuous integration in GitHub, in: Joint
     Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE), 2015, pp. 805–816.
 [8] M. Hilton, T. Tunnell, K. Huang, D. Marinov, D. Dig, Usage, costs, and
     benefits of continuous integration in open-source projects, in: International
     Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE), IEEE, 2016, pp.
     426–437.
 [9] M. Beller, G. Gousios, A. Zaidman, Oops, my tests broke the build: An
     explorative analysis of Travis CI with GitHub, in: International Conference
     on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), IEEE, 2017, pp. 356–367.
[10] M. Golzadeh, A. Decan, T. Mens, On the rise and fall of CI services in
     GitHub, in: International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and
     Reengineering (SANER), 2022.
[11] A. Decan, T. Mens, P. R. Mazrae, M. Golzadeh, On the use of GitHub
     Actions in software development repositories, in: International Conference
     on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), IEEE, 2022.
[12] P. Rostami Mazrae, A. Decan, T. Mens, M. Wessel, A preliminary study of
     GitHub Actions workflow changes, CEUR Workshop Proceedings 3483 (8)
     (2023).

[13] K. Gallaba, S. McIntosh, Use and misuse of continuous integration features:
     An empirical study of projects that (mis) use Travis CI, Transactions on
     Software Engineering 46 (1) (2018) 33–50.
[14] T. Durieux, R. Abreu, M. Monperrus, T. F. Bissyandé, L. Cruz, An analysis
     of 35+ million jobs of Travis CI, in: International Conference on Software
     Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), IEEE, 2019, pp. 291–295.
[15] F. Zampetti, C. Vassallo, S. Panichella, G. Canfora, H. Gall, M. Di Penta,
     An empirical characterization of bad practices in continuous integration,
     Empirical Software Engineering 25 (2020) 1095–1135.

[16] F. Zampetti, S. Geremia, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta, CI/CD pipelines evolu-
     tion and restructuring: A qualitative and quantitative study, in: Interna-
     tional Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), IEEE,
     2021, pp. 471–482.



                                       36
[17] P. Valenzuela-Toledo, A. Bergel, Evolution of GitHub Action workflows,
     in: International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengi-
     neering (SANER), IEEE, 2022, pp. 123–127.
[18] E. Soares, G. Sizilio, J. Santos, D. A. da Costa, U. Kulesza, The effects
     of continuous integration on software development: a systematic literature
     review, Empirical Software Engineering 27 (3) (2022) 1–61.
[19] L. Chen, Continuous delivery: Huge benefits, but challenges too, IEEE
     Software - special issue on Release Engineering 32 (2) (2015) 50–54.
[20] L. Chen, Continuous delivery: Overcoming adoption challenges, Journal of
     Systems and Software (JSS) 128 (2017) 72–86.
[21] R. M. Betz, R. C. Walker, Implementing continuous integration software
     in an established computational chemistry software package, in: Interna-
     tional Workshop on Software Engineering for Computational Science and
     Engineering (SE-CSE), IEEE, 2013, pp. 68–74.

[22] J. Lu, Z. Yang, J. Qian, Implementation of continuous integration and au-
     tomated testing in software development of smart grid scheduling support
     system, in: International Conference on Power System Technology, IEEE,
     2014, pp. 2441–2446.
[23] M. Kulas, J. L. Borelli, W. Gässler, D. Peter, S. Rabien, G. O. de Xivry,
     L. Busoni, M. Bonaglia, T. Mazzoni, G. Rahmer, Practical experience with
     test-driven development during commissioning of the multi-star AO sys-
     tem ARGOS, in: Software and Cyberinfrastructure for Astronomy III, Vol.
     9152, SPIE, 2014, pp. 110–119.
[24] J. Gmeiner, R. Ramler, J. Haslinger, Automated testing in the continuous
     delivery pipeline: A case study of an online company, in: International
     Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation Workshops
     (ICSTW), IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[25] X. Jin, Y. Feng, C. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Gao, K. Xia, L. Guo, Pipelin-
     eAsCode: A CI/CD workflow management system through configuration
     files at ByteDance, in: International Conference on Software Analysis, Evo-
     lution and Reengineering (SANER), IEEE, 2024, pp. 1011–1022.
[26] O. Elazhary, C. Werner, Z. S. Li, D. Lowlind, N. A. Ernst, M.-A. Storey,
     Uncovering the benefits and challenges of continuous integration practices,
     IEEE Trans Softw Eng 48 (7) (2022) 2570 – 2583.

[27] F. Zampetti, S. Scalabrino, R. Oliveto, G. Canfora, M. Di Penta, How
     open source projects use static code analysis tools in continuous integration
     pipelines, in: International Conference on Mining Software Repositories
     (MSR), 2017, pp. 334–344.



                                       37
[28] C. Vassallo, S. Proksch, H. C. Gall, M. Di Penta, Automated reporting of
     anti-patterns and decay in continuous integration, in: International Con-
     ference on Software Engineering (ICSE), IEEE, 2019, pp. 105–115.
[29] T. Kinsman, M. Wessel, M. A. Gerosa, C. Treude, How do software devel-
     opers use GitHub Actions to automate their workflows?, in: International
     Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), IEEE, 2021, pp. 420–
     431.
[30] T. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, T. Wang, Y. Wu, Let’s supercharge the work-
     flows: An empirical study of GitHub Actions, in: International Conference
     on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C), IEEE,
     2021, pp. 01–10.
[31] S. G. Saroar, M. Nayebi, Developers’ perception of GitHub Actions: A
     survey analysis, in: International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment
     in Software Engineering (EASE), 2023.
[32] A. Decan, T. Mens, P. Grosjean, An empirical comparison of dependency
     network evolution in seven software packaging ecosystems, Empirical Soft-
     ware Engineering 24 (2019) 381–416.
[33] A. Decan, T. Mens, E. Constantinou, On the impact of security vulnerabil-
     ities in the npm package dependency network, in: International Conference
     on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2018, pp. 181–191.

[34] H. Onsori Delicheh, A. Decan, T. Mens, Quantifying security issues in
     reusable JavaScript Actions in GitHub workflows, in: International Con-
     ference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), ACM, 2024, pp. 692–703.
[35] M. M. Lehman, Laws of software evolution revisited, in: European Work-
     shop on Software Process Technology (EWPST), Springer, 1996, pp. 108–
     124.
[36] J. Huang, B. Lin, CIGAR: Contrastive learning for GitHub Action recom-
     mendation, in: International Working Conference on Source Code Analysis
     and Manipulation (SCAM), IEEE, 2023, pp. 61–71.

[37] X. Zhang, S. Muralee, S. Cherupattamoolayil, A. Machiry, On the effec-
     tiveness of large language models for GitHub workflows, in: International
     Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES), ARES ’24,
     2024.
[38] P. Valenzuela-Toledo, A. Bergel, T. Kehrer, O. Nierstrasz, The hidden costs
     of automation: An empirical study on GitHub Actions workflow mainte-
     nance, in: International Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipu-
     lation (SCAM), IEEE, 2024.




                                      38
[39] A. Khatami, C. Willekens, A. Zaidman, Catching smells in the act: A
     GitHub Actions workflow investigation, in: International Working Confer-
     ence on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM), IEEE, 2024.
[40] D. C. Watkins, G. Deborah, Mixed Methods Research, Oxford University
     Press, 2015.

[41] G. Cardoen, T. Mens, A. Decan, A dataset of GitHub Actions workflow
     histories, in: International Conference on Mining Software Repositories
     (MSR), ACM, 2024.
[42] N. Nagappan, A. Zeller, T. Zimmermann, K. Herzig, B. Murphy, Change
     bursts as defect predictors, in: International Symposium on Software Reli-
     ability Engineering, IEEE, 2010, pp. 309–318.
[43] C. Bird, D. Ford, T. Zimmermann, N. Forsgren, K. Eirini, T. Lowdermilk,
     I. Gazit, Taking flight with Copilot: Early insights and opportunities of
     AI-powered pair-programming tools, ACM Queue 20 (6) (2023). doi:10.
     1145/3582502.
[44] M. Halperin, K. G. Lan, M. I. Hamdy, Some implications of an alternative
     definition of the multiple comparison problem, Biometrika 75 (4) (1988)
     773–778.
[45] J. Romano, J. Kromrey, J. Coraggio, L. Skowronek, J.and Devine, Ex-
     ploring methods for evaluating group differences on the NSSE and other
     surveys: Are the t-test and Cohen’s d indices the most appropriate choices?,
     in: Annual Meeting of the Southern Association for Institutional Research,
     2006.
[46] L. Spencer, J. Ritchie, J. Lewis, L. Dillon, et al., Quality in qualitative
     evaluation: a framework for assessing research evidence (2004).
[47] E. Burmeister, L. M. Aitken, Sample size: How many is enough?, Aus-
     tralian Critical Care 25 (4) (2012) 271–274.
[48] D. Spencer, Card sorting: Designing usable categories, Rosenfeld Media,
     2009.

[49] D. R. Garrison, M. Cleveland-Innes, M. Koole, J. Kappelman, Revisiting
     methodological issues in transcript analysis: Negotiated coding and relia-
     bility, The internet and higher education 9 (1) (2006) 1–8.
[50] P. Rostami Mazrae, A. Decan, T. Mens, gawd: A differencing tool for
     GitHub Actions workflows (2024).
[51] R. Robbes, T. Matricon, T. Degueule, A. Hora, S. Zacchiroli, Promises,
     perils, and (timely) heuristics for mining coding agent activity, in: Inter-
     national Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2026.



                                       39
[52] G. Cardoen, T. Mens, A. Decan, An empirical analysis of code clones in
     github actions workflows, in: International Conference on Software Analy-
     sis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER), 2026.
[53] T. Ghaleb, O. Abduljalil, S. Hassan, CI/CD configuration practices in
     open-source Android apps: An empirical study, Transactions on Software
     Engineering and Methodology (2024).
[54] E. Constantinou, T. Mens, An empirical comparison of developer retention
     in the RubyGems and npm software ecosystems, Innovations in Systems
     and Software Engineering 13 (2) (2017) 101–115.

[55] G. Avelino, E. Constantinou, M. T. Valente, A. Serebrenik, On the aban-
     donment and survival of open source projects: An empirical investigation,
     in: International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Mea-
     surement (ESEM), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–12.
[56] R. Kaur, K. Kaur, Insights into developers’ abandonment in FLOSS
     projects, in: Intelligent Sustainable Systems: Selected Papers of WorldS4
     2021, Volume 1, Springer, 2022, pp. 731–740.
[57] I. Bouzenia, M. Pradel, Resource usage and optimization opportunities in
     workflows of GitHub Actions, in: International Conference on Software
     Engineering (ICSE), ACM, 2024.

[58] H. Mohayeji, A. Agaronian, E. Constantinou, N. Zannone, A. Serebrenik,
     Investigating the resolution of vulnerable dependencies with Dependabot
     security updates, in: International Conference on Mining Software Repos-
     itories (MSR), ACM, 2023, pp. 234–246.
[59] A. Decan, T. Mens, H. Onsori Delicheh, On the outdatedness of workflows
     in the GitHub Actions ecosystem, Journal of Systems and Software 206
     (2023).
[60] F. Moriconi, T. Durieux, J.-R. Falleri, R. Troncy, A. Francillon, GHALogs:
     Large-scale dataset of GitHub Actions runs, in: International Conference
     on Mining Software Repositories (MSR) - Data and Tool Showcase Track,
     2025.
[61] C. Wohlin, P. Runeson, M. Höst, M. C. Ohlsson, B. Regnell, A. Wesslén,
     et al., Experimentation in software engineering, Vol. 236, Springer, 2012.
[62] C. Bird, P. C. Rigby, E. T. Barr, D. J. Hamilton, D. M. German, P. De-
     vanbu, The promises and perils of mining git, in: International Working
     Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[63] E. Kalliamvakou, G. Gousios, K. Blincoe, L. Singer, D. M. German,
     D. Damian, An in-depth study of the promises and perils of mining GitHub,
     Empirical Software Engineering 21 (5) (2016) 2035–2071.


                                      40
