                                                                                                                                                 International Journal of Software Engineering
                                                                                                                                                 and Knowledge Engineering
                                                                                                                                                 Vol. 33, No. 1 (2023) 1–21
                                                                                                                                                 #.c World Scienti¯c Publishing Company
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 DOI: 10.1142/S0218194022500553




                                                                                                                                                           Extension of a Simulation Software to Incorporate
                                                                                                                                                          Quality-Related Factors in Investigations on Software
                                                                                                                                                                        Engineering Economics
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                                                             David Kuhlen*
                                                                                                                                                                                   IU University of Applied Sciences
                                                                                                                                                                               Waterloohain 9, 22769 Hamburg, Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                         david.kuhlen@iu.org

                                                                                                                                                                                             Andreas Speck
                                                                                                                                                                                                             at zu Kiel
                                                                                                                                                                                Christian-Albrechts-Universit€
                                                                                                                                                                           Hermann-Rodewald-Straße 3, 24118 Kiel, Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                     aspe@informatik.uni-kiel.de


                                                                                                                                                                                        Received 10 March 2022
                                                                                                                                                                                        Accepted 23 August 2022
                                                                                                                                                                                       Published 7 December 2022


                                                                                                                                                      The economics of software engineering [B. W. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics,
                                                                                                                                                      Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cli®s, New Jersey, 1981] are strongly in°uenced by the way how
                                                                                                                                                      software development processes are performed. Simulations give valuable insights in the per-
                                                                                                                                                      formance of these processes. In order to research the economics of software engineering, a
                                                                                                                                                      process analysis studio (PAS) was developed and presented [D. Kuhlen and A. Speck, Business
                                                                                                                                                      process analysis by model checking, in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Data-Driven Process Discovery and
                                                                                                                                                      Analysis SIMPDA, eds. P. Ceravolo and S. Rinderle-Ma, 2015; D. Kuhlen and A. Speck, The
                                                                                                                                                      way of designing a simulation software in order to evaluate the economic performance in
                                                                                                                                                      software development, in ICCMS '17 Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Computer Modeling and Simulation,
                                                                                                                                                      Int. Conf. Proc. Series by ACM, 2016; D. Kuhlen, Kostensenkungspotenzialfunktion der Soft-
                                                                                                                                                      wareproduktion, dissertation, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, 2019]. This simulation
                                                                                                                                                      software was built to analyze the capacitive con¯gurations of the software production. It helps
                                                                                                                                                      to assess the impact of di®erent con¯gurations on the process output. However, this research
                                                                                                                                                      emphasizes the impact of quality-related factors (QRFs) on the process output. This paper
                                                                                                                                                      presents a proposal how to extend the simulation software model in order to facilitate quali-
                                                                                                                                                      tative analysis. In order to facilitate the understanding of the model and the evaluation of the
                                                                                                                                                      contribution, o®ered by the proposal, Prolog codes are used.

                                                                                                                                                      Keywords: Software engineering; software development; IT-management; quality-related
                                                                                                                                                      factors; simulation.




                                                                                                                                                 *Corresponding author.



                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                 2   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                 1. Introduction
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 As a consequence of competition in the ¯eld of software engineering economics
                                                                                                                                                 (SEE), software producing companies (SPC) seek for optimized production pro-
                                                                                                                                                 cedures which have less costs [10, 11, 31]. Enhanced techniques for analyses fa-
                                                                                                                                                 cilitate business to improve the software production process (SPP). This paper
                                                                                                                                                 focuses on the simulation-based analysis of software production processes
                                                                                                                                                 (SASPP).
                                                                                                                                                     Simulations o®er the potential to analyze the performance of SPPs [10, p. 2; 15,
                                                                                                                                                 p. 14]. The software process has an increased complexity, because of multiple
                                                                                                                                                 feedback loops [2, p. 6; 15]. Such processes can hardly be analyzed by other tech-
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 niques [29]. Previous investigations in [21] or [18] showed a valid method that
                                                                                                                                                 facilitates the analysis of SPPs by using a process analysis studio (PAS) software,
                                                                                                                                                 ¯rst presented in [16]. However, the current version of the PAS is optimized to the
                                                                                                                                                 analysis of con¯guration-related attributes of production processes. It helps to an-
                                                                                                                                                 swer questions about how to plan processes, in order to reach advantages for the
                                                                                                                                                 production costs. However, the performance of software development is also dic-
                                                                                                                                                 tated by decisions, made during software development [10, 15, 33]. In order to
                                                                                                                                                 evaluate the business impact of di®erent management decisions, a changed simu-
                                                                                                                                                 lation model is needed.
                                                                                                                                                     The current version of the PAS is heavyweight. It consists of multiple applica-
                                                                                                                                                 tions which have to be installed [21]. Current research revealed the software de-
                                                                                                                                                 velopment process to be directed by the decisions of di®erent characters [13]. In
                                                                                                                                                 order to get further insights into the economic progression of software development,
                                                                                                                                                 a new investigation is started. This research investigates di®erent types of behavior
                                                                                                                                                 of actors within the development [33]. The analysis of quality-related factors
                                                                                                                                                 (QRFs) becomes important. This paper analyzes the current simulation model. On
                                                                                                                                                 the basis of this analysis, a new proposal for an enhanced simulation model will be
                                                                                                                                                 developed.
                                                                                                                                                     In this paper we want to clarify how to design a simulation, giving further insights
                                                                                                                                                 into the SEE, regarding to QRFs. To contribute to the ¯eld of SEE, especially to
                                                                                                                                                 SASPP, we want to answer the following questions:

                                                                                                                                                 RQ1: How to describe cause and e®ect relations in the SEE? Which levels cover
                                                                                                                                                      aspects, regarding to the SEE?
                                                                                                                                                 RQ2: How could a model of SPP be formalized, that could be completed with situ-
                                                                                                                                                      ational details, ¯tting to di®erent investigations, in order to facilitate the
                                                                                                                                                      analysis of the impact, QRFs have on the success of SEE?
                                                                                                                                                 RQ3: How to change the simulation software in order to facilitate dynamic inves-
                                                                                                                                                      tigations on the impact of QRFs?

                                                                                                                                                    In order to answer these research questions, the paper presents the related work in
                                                                                                                                                 the next section. The section ends by presenting cause and e®ect relationships
                                                                                                                                                 (CaER) which have an impact on the economic success of SEE. On the basis of these
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Extension of a Simulation Software   3


                                                                                                                                                 ¯ndings, Sec. 3 presents the research method. Prolog is used to describe a formalized
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 model which helps to facilitate the understanding of the underlying model. A solu-
                                                                                                                                                 tion is proposed in Sec. 5. This proposal is evaluated in Sec. 6 on the basis of an
                                                                                                                                                 experiment, executed in Prolog.


                                                                                                                                                 2. Related Work
                                                                                                                                                 Current research within the ¯eld of software engineering analyzes how management
                                                                                                                                                 decisions a®ect the costs. Many di®erent articles are related to the topic of this
                                                                                                                                                 research. This paper addresses the ¯elds of simulation software and software engi-
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 neering investigation. Within the ¯eld of simulation software other articles like
                                                                                                                                                 [20, 26, 28, 31] are interesting. Other articles, such as [27], analyze the dynamics
                                                                                                                                                 within software development.
                                                                                                                                                     Within his work, Jørgensen analyzes the utilization of simple heuristics, used by
                                                                                                                                                 management in order to make decisions [13]. Jørgensen compared current decision
                                                                                                                                                 situations with the time-saving-bias. Based on two given teams which have di®erent
                                                                                                                                                 productivity he asked managers to decide which of the team's productivity should be
                                                                                                                                                 improved, in order to decrease the total duration [13]. Jørgensen revealed that
                                                                                                                                                 management tends to use simple heuristics which does not lead to correct decisions
                                                                                                                                                 [13, p. 6]. On the basis of the evaluation of a survey, Jørgensen suggests management
                                                                                                                                                 to be trained in making resource decisions [13, p. 6].
                                                                                                                                                     However, next to train management, there would be another way to improve the
                                                                                                                                                 correctness of business decisions. Many kinds of decisions (like those of the analysis of
                                                                                                                                                 Jørgensen) could be answered by performing simulations. An early model for simu-
                                                                                                                                                 lations was described by Abdel-Hamid. The model of Abdel-Hamid gives manage-
                                                                                                                                                 ment a framework to test their decisions [1, p. 19]. Abdel-Hamid's model bases on a
                                                                                                                                                 system dynamics simulation. Such simulations were widely used, for example by van
                                                                                                                                                 Oorschot et al. On the basis of the dynamics within software projects which are
                                                                                                                                                 described in the literature, e.g. [3], van Oorschot et al. analyzed the e®ect of di®erent
                                                                                                                                                 constant sprint lengths in agile projects [24]. They used simulation techniques and
                                                                                                                                                 revealed that the optimal length of iterations should be between 2 and 3 months
                                                                                                                                                 [24, p. 24]. Recently, this model was used by Dong. Dong analyzes a way on how to
                                                                                                                                                 simulate the software development in agile projects [ 7].
                                                                                                                                                     In order to facilitate the decision making, an above-mentioned process analysis
                                                                                                                                                 studio (PAS) software was used in prior work, focusing on the productivity of SEE
                                                                                                                                                 [16, 17]. The current simulation model of the PAS is mainly described in [18, 21]. The
                                                                                                                                                 concept of the PAS allows the creation of processes. A process is de¯ned as a se-
                                                                                                                                                 quence of °ows [14, p. 439]. Matching to this, the PAS understands a process to be set
                                                                                                                                                 of °ows, each °ow connecting two activities [16]. The simulation executes the be-
                                                                                                                                                 havior of actors [19]. Each activity (=vertex) is connected to actors on the basis of a
                                                                                                                                                 team (called ActorGroup). The current version of the PAS works on the basis of a
                                                                                                                                                 web application [21]. The web application will be used in order to create simulation
                                                                                                                                                 models [21]. Users have the possibility to con¯gure the processes by creating
                                                                                                                                                 4   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                 activities, actors, organizations and so on [18]. The di®erent steps which the PAS
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 needs to perform analyses are described in Listing 3 in a simpli¯ed manner.
                                                                                                                                                    The PAS was created to execute simulations on multiple engines [21, p. 345 ®.].
                                                                                                                                                 After the model was created, another client solution will be executed to perform the
                                                                                                                                                 simulations. Multiple clients are synchronized due to their algorithms, using the
                                                                                                                                                 database [21]. Based on this, the workload of a simulation could be divided between
                                                                                                                                                 these clients. This concept bases on the idea of creating orders for each simulation
                                                                                                                                                 task. The illustration in Fig. 1 shows the structure of the PAS. It shows just a key
                                                                                                                                                 part of the simulation model. The whole application kernel consists of more than 200
                                                                                                                                                 classes. Therefore, Fig. 1 is just giving an overview.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 Fig. 1. Short view on the simulation model of the PAS, new illustration on the basis of [18], created with [23].


                                                                                                                                                    Next to other restrictions, the current version of the PAS is designed to analyze
                                                                                                                                                 capacitive con¯gurations of the SPP [21, p. 8]. Especially qualitative properties are
                                                                                                                                                 hard to be analyzed by the current version of the PAS, because their analysis was
                                                                                                                                                 excluded [21, p. 9, 413]. Due to this restriction, di®erent qualitative ways how ac-
                                                                                                                                                 tivities should be executed during the software development, could be hardly ana-
                                                                                                                                                 lyzed. However, as presented in [21, p. 413] enhancements of the simulation model
                                                                                                                                                 could be sensible, in order to incorporate the analysis of QRFs.
                                                                                                                                                    This research bases on research in the ¯eld of SEE, especially regarding to the
                                                                                                                                                 SPP and the ¯eld of simulation. It aims to contribute to improvements of the
                                                                                                                                                 SPP. Elfaiz and Raharjo analyzed obstacles in the software process improvement [8].
                                                                                                                                                 On the basis of a systematic literature review, Elfaiz and Raharjo revealed 13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Extension of a Simulation Software   5


                                                                                                                                                 obstacles, like time pressure, lack of knowledge transfer, lack of resources or budget,
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 lack of roles and responsibility etc. [8, p. 5]. Some of the found obstacles, like a lack of
                                                                                                                                                 trust, are qualitative issues which are hard to analyze with the current version of the
                                                                                                                                                 PAS, as they were excluded in previous versions.
                                                                                                                                                     Simulations are used by multiple studies, too, in order to analyze the performance
                                                                                                                                                 of software development. In the recent past, a lot of research was published within
                                                                                                                                                 the ¯eld of SEE which could be supported by an enhanced simulation model.
                                                                                                                                                     For example, the impact of management decisions within the SPP is an objective
                                                                                                                                                 in the investigations of Kumar et al. [22]. Kumar et al. used simulation techniques in
                                                                                                                                                 order to analyze the e®ect of task priorities on the throughput, within the software
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 development. Considering bottlenecks within the process and di®erent management
                                                                                                                                                 strategies regarding to the preemption of prioritized tasks, they analyzed how
                                                                                                                                                 changes in priorities a®ect the process output [22]. This shows that setting priorities
                                                                                                                                                 has to be incorporated within the analysis of software development.
                                                                                                                                                     The use of agent-based simulations for open-source software development was
                                                                                                                                                 analyzed by Zhao et al. [33]. Zhao et al. developed an agent-based model which
                                                                                                                                                 simulates the behavior of software developers. The model was con¯gured and tested
                                                                                                                                                 on the basis of data which was collected from GitHub by Zhao et al. [33]. On the basis
                                                                                                                                                 of GitHub, Zhao et al. distinguished di®erent types of behavior [33]. The historical
                                                                                                                                                 data from the repository was used to perform a regression analysis. This regression
                                                                                                                                                 facilitated Zhao et al. to formulate the behavior of the agents. The resulting simu-
                                                                                                                                                 lation model could serve as a prediction model. This model helps to predict the
                                                                                                                                                 behavior of developers [33]. On the basis of this model, Zhao et al. could perform an
                                                                                                                                                 experiment to analyze the impact of changing isolated parameters, such as the dif-
                                                                                                                                                 ¯culty of tasks or the type of developers [33]. Such parameters are QRFs as well.




                                                                                                                                                         Listing 1. Description of cause and e®ect relations in SEE, formalized as Prolog-code.

                                                                                                                                                    The achievements from related work show cause and e®ect relationships, e.g. the
                                                                                                                                                 impact of knowledge as thematized by [8] or the impact of the behavior of developers
                                                                                                                                                 as discussed by [33]. Regarding to RQ1, we analyzed the cause and e®ect relations.
                                                                                                                                                 6   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                    We assumed multiple cause and e®ect relations. These relations are illustrated in
                                                                                                                                                 Listing 1 as Prolog-Code. The relation cause (A; BÞ, having the parameters A and B;
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 describes e®ects in the SEE. The relation cause de¯nes the e®ect A to cause e®ect B. As
                                                                                                                                                 for instance, the skill impacts on the costs and training impacts on the skill. Fur-
                                                                                                                                                 thermore, Listing 1 describes how changes of the factors take a®ect such as an increase
                                                                                                                                                 of sale could decrease costs (per unit) because software engineering mainly leads to
                                                                                                                                                 overheads. These overheads come from the high amount of personal costs [6, p. 1055].


                                                                                                                                                 3. Analysis
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 These ¯ndings suggest to answer the research questions, especially RQ2, to facilitate
                                                                                                                                                 further investigations on the performance of the SPP. Answering the research
                                                                                                                                                 questions RQ2 and RQ3 requires the construction of a model. Software engineering
                                                                                                                                                 uses models to describe the concept or architecture of a solution. The regular design
                                                                                                                                                 process, being part of requirements engineering, is shortly described in Fig. 2.




                                                                                                                                                             Fig. 2. Regular design process in SEE, created with [Microsoft Visio Plan 2].


                                                                                                                                                    In order to contribute to the state of the art in science, we use an approved
                                                                                                                                                 research methodology. The method needs to ¯t to the regular process which is
                                                                                                                                                 necessary to design new solution models. In order to develop a new simulation model,
                                                                                                                                                 the design science research methodology, described e.g. by Hevner et al. [12] and
                                                                                                                                                 Pe®ers et al. [25] will be used.
                                                                                                                                                    Referring to the guidelines for design science research, presented by Hevner, March
                                                                                                                                                 and Park, the next section describes the \Problem Relevance" [12, pp. 84–85]. This
                                                                                                                                                 section will describe the problem, the motivation and the requirements for a new solution
                                                                                                                                                 [25, p. 46]. In order to describe the problem, the ¯ndings form literature review are
                                                                                                                                                 used. Section 5 presents the proposed model, referring to \Design as an Artifact"
                                                                                                                                                 [12, pp. 82–84]. The enhancement in the simulation model is presented on the basis of
                                                                                                                                                 UML. This section demonstrates the conceptualized model. The artifact becomes evalu-
                                                                                                                                                 ated in Sec. 6, referring to \Design Evaluation" [12, pp. 85–87]. In Sec. 7, the \Research
                                                                                                                                                 Contributions" [12, p. 87] which were obtained through the whole process are summarized.
                                                                                                                                                    In order to ful¯l Hevner, March and Park's \Guideline 5: Research Rigor"
                                                                                                                                                 [12, pp. 87–88], we use Prolog. The logical programming language facilitates the
                                                                                                                                                 design of a model in a formalized way and its use in executions. This formalization
                                                                                                                                                 supports the understanding of the model and its relation. The art of programming in
                                                                                                                                                 Prolog seems to be understandable \both to technology-oriented as well as man-
                                                                                                                                                 agement-oriented audiences", as required in \Guideline 7: Communication of
                                                                                                                                                 Research" [ 12, p. 83]. Furthermore, as part of the evaluation, we formulate relations
                                                                                                                                                 in Prolog, assuming these relations should formalize the required research interest of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Extension of a Simulation Software   7


                                                                                                                                                 RQ2 and RQ3. Prolog helps to evaluate whether the designed solution will be able to
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 ful¯ll these research questions or not. As RQ1 is part of the preparatory work and
                                                                                                                                                 because of its nature, our proposed answer to this question will be excluded from
                                                                                                                                                 evaluation. In order to perform the evaluation, SWI-Prolog will be used, see [30].


                                                                                                                                                 4. Requirement
                                                                                                                                                 The previous explanations showed the current version of the PAS to be optimized
                                                                                                                                                 for some investigation purposes. As the analysis of QRFs was excluded from
                                                                                                                                                 the PAS, an enhancement is required because we expect QRFs to in°uence the
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 success of SEE.
                                                                                                                                                     Regarding to RQ1, the literature review suggests aspects which take an in°uence
                                                                                                                                                 on the software development and could be divided into four dimensions, as displayed
                                                                                                                                                 in Fig. 3. Next to quantitative aspects [4] [10, p. 2] [20, p. 322], qualitative aspects
                                                                                                                                                 [2] [4] [27] [31, p. 1 & p. 28] also in°uence the success of development projects.
                                                                                                                                                 Furthermore, the success of software development is in°uenced by the SPP itself
                                                                                                                                                 [4, 9, 10]. However, there are more existing factors which could not be matched to the
                                                                                                                                                 process. Such factors within the situation related dimension in°uence the software
                                                                                                                                                 development but are not covered by the process itself [27].




                                                                                                                                                 Fig. 3. Proposed model, classifying aspects which in°uence the SEE, created with Microsoft Word as part
                                                                                                                                                 of Microsoft O±ce Home and Business 2019 which is a product of the Microsoft Corporation.


                                                                                                                                                    The analysis of di®erent management decisions will be possible if alternative
                                                                                                                                                 situations and possible decisions, matching these situations, could be expressed
                                                                                                                                                 within a model. A situation which requires a management decision is given by the
                                                                                                                                                 state of di®erent objects (e.g. the number of tasks, the workload of the team, the
                                                                                                                                                 similarity of the current task to the functionality of the existing software. . .).
                                                                                                                                                 8   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                 During the simulation, this state is described as simulation model, covering the
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 process model and the key performance indicators (KPIs) which describe the current
                                                                                                                                                 situation. Most of these attitudes could be expressed as values of key performance
                                                                                                                                                 indicators. Important management decisions aim to handle the cause and e®ect
                                                                                                                                                 relations, described in Listing 1. By simplifying the possible alternatives, a decision
                                                                                                                                                 could aim to increase, decrease or stabilize factors within the cause-and-e®ect rela-
                                                                                                                                                 tionship (CaER), as described in Listing 2.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                                   Listing 2. Handling of CaER-factors, formalized as Prolog-code.


                                                                                                                                                     Decisions consist on the situation (circumstances of the environment) and their
                                                                                                                                                 impact. Next to the KPIs which describe a situation a management decision has an
                                                                                                                                                 impact on the progression of the software development.
                                                                                                                                                     The required model changes to incorporate QRFs in the analysis need to ful¯l the
                                                                                                                                                 following requirements:

                                                                                                                                                 . Referring to RQ2: A `quality-functor' has to be designed which in°uences the
                                                                                                                                                   economic situation during the progression. This functor is a mapping of the inputs
                                                                                                                                                   quality, the simulation model and the case to the outputs case and the simulation
                                                                                                                                                   model. The case describes the object being processed during the process while it is
                                                                                                                                                   executed in the simulation. The quality should be de¯ned for individual entity
                                                                                                                                                   types with individual levels of details. qFunctor(quality, simulation model, case)!
                                                                                                                                                   (case, simulation model).
                                                                                                                                                 . Referring to RQ3: The quality should be in°uenced by itself, in order to facilitate
                                                                                                                                                   dynamic investigations.


                                                                                                                                                 5. Concept for a New Simulation Solution
                                                                                                                                                 In order to analyze the impact of QRFs, the PAS has to be changed. To lead to an
                                                                                                                                                 improvement, this section comes with a proposal for an improvement of the
                                                                                                                                                 PAS. This improvement aims at the progression within the simulation. In order to
                                                                                                                                                 describe the change adequately, important parts of the current version of the PAS
                                                                                                                                                 have to be described.
                                                                                                                                                    The current version of the PAS works on the basis of a web application. The web
                                                                                                                                                 application will be used in order to create process models. Users have the possibility
                                                                                                                                                 to con¯gure the processes by creating activities, actors, organizations and so on [18].
                                                                                                                                                 After the creation of the model, the process analysis studio engine (PASE) will be
                                                                                                                                                 executed to perform the simulations. Multiple clients are synchronized due to their
                                                                                                                                                 algorithms, using the database.
                                                                                                                Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
                                                                                       by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




Listing 3. Description of the current simulation behavior of the PAS as Prolog-code.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Extension of a Simulation Software




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fig. 4. Current Process, describing the progession of the PAS, created with [Microsoft Visio Plan 2].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                                 10   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                     Figure 4 displays the two main processes, the PASEs are following. The execution
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 bases on orders, being created. An order describes an action which is executed by an
                                                                                                                                                 actor. Di®erent kinds of orders are executed in a special order, regarding to the
                                                                                                                                                 process execution. This model facilitates the analysis of con¯guration-related
                                                                                                                                                 aspects. In order to perform SASPPs, multiple objects have to be created in a special
                                                                                                                                                 order. By Listing 3 important steps of the simulation are described in a simpli¯ed
                                                                                                                                                 manner. The relation perform (S; I; OÞ describes those steps. Each step (SÞ requires a
                                                                                                                                                 list of inputs (IÞ and results in a list of outputs (OÞ. Furthermore, Listing 3 formalizes
                                                                                                                                                 the order of necessary steps which has to be executed to perform the SASPP.
                                                                                                                                                     The main part which is responsible for the qualitative, semantic behaviour of
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 actors is the reaction. Currently, actors could react in four ways: they could create
                                                                                                                                                 instances (=like tasks), they could work on the instances, tasks, they could move the
                                                                                                                                                 instances within the process and they could be waiting for work [18, 21]. Those types
                                                                                                                                                 of reactions are generic, regarding the processing. As it is described in Fig. 1, reac-
                                                                                                                                                 tions are derived from the abstract class AbstractReaction [18, 21]. Obviously, this
                                                                                                                                                 model facilitates the expansion in order to introduce more kinds of reactions. How-
                                                                                                                                                 ever, in Fig. 4 the step react which executes the reaction, aims at processing of the
                                                                                                                                                 workload within the process model. Therefore, it would be an easy solution to add
                                                                                                                                                 new subtypes of reactions.
                                                                                                                                                     However, this generic way of how to work, following a process, should not be
                                                                                                                                                 changed. Another change-point is needed to make sure QRFs impact on the pro-
                                                                                                                                                 gression. To realize the introduction of qualitative analysis, we enhanced the model
                                                                                                                                                 of the PAS, as described in Fig. 5.
                                                                                                                                                     In the new version of the PAS, the step react is embedded within two signals.
                                                                                                                                                 These signals trigger a pre- and post-qualitative-reactions. This qualitative reaction
                                                                                                                                                 could be de¯ned individually, by using the interface IPerforming (see Fig. 6). The
                                                                                                                                                 steps collect associated objects and perform their behaviour for each object, de-
                                                                                                                                                 scribed in steps, too. A cascade of calls to the pre- and post-qualitative reactions
                                                                                                                                                 follows. This allows qualitative behaviour to in°uence the processing without
                                                                                                                                                 changing the processing itself.
                                                                                                                                                     The progression of the extension of the PAS could also be described on the basis of
                                                                                                                                                 the perform-relation, showed in Listing 3. The change of the PAS to incorporate the
                                                                                                                                                 analysis of QRF requires an addition of the two steps preQAction and postQAction,
                                                                                                                                                 covering the signals before reaction and after reaction illustrated in Fig. 5. These
                                                                                                                                                 steps have to be incorporated in the regular execution. Therefore, just the step
                                                                                                                                                 \executeSimulation" has to be adapted.
                                                                                                                                                     Listing 4 describes the changes in the PAS in a simpli¯ed form, formalized in
                                                                                                                                                 Prolog. The new version of the step \executeSimulation", displayed in Listing 4,
                                                                                                                                                 integrated the new steps, realizing an execution before- and after-reactions. In order
                                                                                                                                                 to realize the new behaviour, described in Fig. 5, new classes are necessary. Figure 6
                                                                                                                                                 shows the enhanced class model. As illustrated, the IPerforming interface is imple-
                                                                                                                                                 mented e.g. by the classes Actor, Instance, Vertex and so on. In investigations
                                                                                                                                                 without the need to analyse the impact of QRF, a basis implementation of these
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Extension of a Simulation Software   11
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                               Fig. 5. New Progression Model, created with [Microsoft Visio Plan 2].


                                                                                                                                                 classes could be used. If a special behaviour is necessary, individual sub classes of
                                                                                                                                                 these classes could be derived, o®ering a specialized qualitative behaviour. The
                                                                                                                                                 use of such an interface serves as a generic solution. It facilitates the




                                                                                                                                                        Listing 4. Adapted and added steps of the PAS, description simpli¯ed as Prolog-code.
                                                                                                                                                 12   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                            Fig. 6. Enhanced class model of the PAS, created with [Microsoft Visio Plan 2].


                                                                                                                                                 implementation of own types, describing individual behaviour. This provides a
                                                                                                                                                 solution, regarding to RQ2.
                                                                                                                                                    The execution of the new progression model, illustrated in Fig. 5, requires a new
                                                                                                                                                 controller class PController. The controller is responsible for the collection of asso-
                                                                                                                                                 ciated PASObjects. The collection bases on a register of associated objects. Next to
                                                                                                                                                 this register, all IPerforming objects which are closely related to an instance will be
                                                                                                                                                 collected to ¯nd associates.
                                                                                                                                                    The division of the steps pre- and post-reactions, which incorporates QRFs in the
                                                                                                                                                 simulation, facilitates the implementation of dynamic simulation behaviour. Dy-
                                                                                                                                                 namic simulation capabilities require a factor in°uencing itself due to multiple
                                                                                                                                                 feedback loops, leading to continuous modelling [15, 32]. Thus, the proposed en-
                                                                                                                                                 hancement of the PAS allows the incorporation of dynamic capabilities if the post-
                                                                                                                                                 QAction impacts on the quality itself.
                                                                                                                                                    Figure 7 shows the interaction of pre- and postQActions. As presented in Fig. 6,
                                                                                                                                                 the particular behaviour of these -QActions could be de¯ned individually by adap-
                                                                                                                                                 tions in the source code, ¯tting to di®erent investigations. In order to ful¯l the
                                                                                                                                                 requirement of RQ2, the proposed model de¯nes an interface IPerforming which
                                                                                                                                                 could be implemented on an individual basis for di®erent investigation purposes.
                                                                                                                                                 This implementation should be designed to facilitate dynamic investigations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Extension of a Simulation Software   13
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 Fig. 7. Interaction of pre- and postQAction reactions, created with Microsoft Word as part of Microsoft
                                                                                                                                                 O±ce Home and Business 2019 which is a product of the Microsoft Corporation.


                                                                                                                                                 (see RQ3). Therefore, it would be recommended to use the preQAction to make sure
                                                                                                                                                 the quality impacts on the success. The postQAction could be used in order to make
                                                                                                                                                 sure that the model of quality itself changes. This could lead to dynamic behaviour.


                                                                                                                                                 6. Analysis of the Sustainability
                                                                                                                                                 This analysis aims at demonstrating the bene¯t of the proposed extension. It bases on
                                                                                                                                                 logical conclusions on the basis of the assumed relations. In order to achieve some
                                                                                                                                                 formality and objectivity regarding to the evaluation of the logical conclusions [30], will
                                                                                                                                                 be used. However, the assumptions and the assumed logical relations cause the eval-
                                                                                                                                                 uation to be subjective, partially. In order to decrease subjectivity, the assumptions
                                                                                                                                                 and the assumed logical relations could be adjusted, suitable to the respective cir-
                                                                                                                                                 cumstances, e.g. in corporate practice, development projects or research projects.
                                                                                                                                                    First, it has to be analyzed whether it is meaningful to incorporate QRFs
                                                                                                                                                 in economic analyses. This ¯rst evaluation bases on the CaERs are described in
                                                                                                                                                 Listing 1.




                                                                                                                                                                   Listing 5. Analyze the impact of QRFs, formalized as Prolog-code.
                                                                                                                                                 14   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                     In order to evaluate whether it is meaningful to incorporate QRFs in simulation
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 analyses, it has to be established if QRF impacts on the economic success of
                                                                                                                                                 SEE. The incorporation of QRFs in SASPP could be seen as sensible if the QRF has a
                                                                                                                                                 direct or transitive impact. This is described by the relation analysis meaningful in
                                                                                                                                                 Listing 5: As the costs are relevant for the success of SEE, we could perform the query
                                                                                                                                                 illustrated in Listing 6. The query would succeed with a positive result, using SWI-
                                                                                                                                                 Prolog version 8.2.4.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                                 Listing 6. Relevance of QRF, executed in SWI-Prolog version 8.2.4.


                                                                                                                                                     The next step in the evaluation aims to determine whether the change of the PAS,
                                                                                                                                                 described in Listing 4, facilitates the analysis of QRFs. Therefore, a relation possi-
                                                                                                                                                 bleImpactAnalysis(A, B) is required. This relation should con¯rm if factor A in°u-
                                                                                                                                                 ences factor B within the simulation. In order to determine this in°uence, a relation
                                                                                                                                                 toDo is necessary which determines the steps (S) being necessary to in°uence factor
                                                                                                                                                 B. The execution of those steps (SÞ leads to (output-)data (DÞ. If this output (DÞ
                                                                                                                                                 contains the factor A, the factor A impacts on B. The whole evaluation is presented
                                                                                                                                                 in Listing 7.
                                                                                                                                                     Obviously, the relations contains(List, Element) and containsAll(MainList,
                                                                                                                                                 SubList) are well known functors, con¯rming whether an element or a sublist is part
                                                                                                                                                 of a list. The query ?- containsAll([a, b, c], [a, b]). leads to the answer true in Prolog
                                                                                                                                                 interpreters, e.g. SWI-Prolog version 8.2.4. Clockin and Mellish described similar
                                                                                                                                                 relations member and subset [5, p. 160]. The relation append allows to connect lists
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 [5, p. 63]. In order to simplify the illustrations a relation echo( ) :- write(`
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -`). is
                                                                                                                                                 used, showing `headlines' in the terminal.
                                                                                                                                                     On the basis of the relations displayed in Listing 7, it could be evaluated whether
                                                                                                                                                 it is possible to analyze the impact of QRF on the economic success of software
                                                                                                                                                 production after the model of the PAS will be changed. If the enhancement of the
                                                                                                                                                 model facilitates the analysis of QRFs, it should be possible to analyze the impact of
                                                                                                                                                 quality on the success. In terms of the simpli¯ed Prolog-code, the query
                                                                                                                                                 ?possibleImpactAnalysis(quality, cost) should succeed after the change of Listing 4
                                                                                                                                                 was implemented.
                                                                                                                                                     In order to perform the evaluation, regarding to RQ2 and RQ3, an experiment
                                                                                                                                                 will be accomplished on the basis of the relations, displayed in Listing 7 and the
                                                                                                                                                 above-mentioned relations. The model of the current version of the PAS (5.1.16)
                                                                                                                                                 which is simpli¯ed in Listing 3 is contained in the ¯le pas simpli¯ed
                                                                                                                                                 model Version5116.
                                                                                                                                                     The proposed changes which are modeled in Listing 4, in a simpli¯ed manner,
                                                                                                                                                 should a®ect the current model. Therefore, the old step executeSimulation has to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Extension of a Simulation Software   15
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                          Listing 7. Necessary relations to evaluate the possible impact of QRFs in Prolog.


                                                                                                                                                 replaced. In order to replace the predicate, it was removed by using the built-in
                                                                                                                                                 predicate retract [5, p. 127] at ¯rst. The new version of the step executeSimulation
                                                                                                                                                 was inserted by using the built-in-predicate assertz [5, p. 126] which will be used to
                                                                                                                                                 add the steps preQAction and postQAction, too.
                                                                                                                                                    First, Listing 8 shows that the current version of the PAS facilitates the analysis
                                                                                                                                                 of e®ort, impacting the economic success of software engineering. However, the
                                                                                                                                                 current model does not support the analysis of quality's impact on the economic
                                                                                                                                                 success. The query ?- possibleImpactAnalysis(quality, cost). does not succeed until
                                                                                                                                                 the simulation model will be changed. After the simpli¯ed model of the PAS was
                                                                                                                                                 changed as proposed, the ability of the simulation software changes. The
                                                                                                            Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
                                                                                   by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16




                                                                                                      version 8.2.4.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D. Kuhlen & A. Speck




Listing 9. Relation to determine whether the model has dynamic impact in Prolog.
                                                                                                      Listing 8. Evaluation of the proposed extension for the PAS simulation model, executed in SWI Prolog
                                                                                                                                    Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
                                                                                                           by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




SWI-Prolog, version 8.2.4.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Extension of a Simulation Software




Listing 10. Result of the evaluation of the contribution of the proposal to RQ3, executed Prolog code in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                                 18   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                 introduction of the new steps preQAction and postQAction facilitates the analysis of
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                 the impact the quality has on the costs which is a relevant KPI describing the
                                                                                                                                                 pro¯tability of software engineering. This suggests the proposed model in Sec. 5 to be
                                                                                                                                                 a sustainable solution for RQ2.
                                                                                                                                                    Regarding to the evaluation of RQ3, a relation has to be formulated which
                                                                                                                                                 determines whether the proposed model facilitates dynamic investigations. In order
                                                                                                                                                 to evaluate the contribution of the proposed enhancement of the PAS to RQ3, the
                                                                                                                                                 relation hasDynamicImpact(Df, Io) was de¯ned as illustrated in Listing 9. This
                                                                                                                                                 relation con¯rms if a factor (Df) has a dynamic impact on another factor (Io).
                                                                                                                                                    The relation hasDynamicImpact(Df, Io) succeeds if Df impacts on Io and if during
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                 this impact the Df is in°uenced by itself. A factor Df is being in°uenced by itself if the
                                                                                                                                                 outputted state of the factor is input of another function which in°uences Df again.
                                                                                                                                                    As illustrated in Listing 10, the evaluation revealed dynamic investigations to be
                                                                                                                                                 facilitated by the proposed addition of the step postQAction. This con¯rms the
                                                                                                                                                 proposed model to be a valid solution, ful¯lling the requirement of RQ3.


                                                                                                                                                 7. Conclusions
                                                                                                                                                 The analysis of software production processes via simulations gives helpful insights in
                                                                                                                                                 software engineering economics (SEE) [4]. Factors which in°uence the productivity
                                                                                                                                                 should be incorporated in the simulation to facilitate the analysis of di®erent decision
                                                                                                                                                 alternatives. This could help decision makers to perform well. Next to capacity-
                                                                                                                                                 oriented factors, like sta±ng etc., quality-related factors (QRF) are also seen as an
                                                                                                                                                 in°uence on the outcome of software production.
                                                                                                                                                     This paper investigates how to enhance the model of a process analysis studio
                                                                                                                                                 software (PAS), ¯rst presented in [16], in order to perform analyses, considering
                                                                                                                                                 qualitative behavior. It proposes a new model, consisting of performable objects.
                                                                                                                                                 Objects which have a qualitative behavior could implement the interface IPer-
                                                                                                                                                 forming to be executed during the simulation.
                                                                                                                                                     The execution of the behavior surrounds the regular processing. The processing
                                                                                                                                                 which aims at the abidance of the process description should be surrounded by a
                                                                                                                                                 pre-behavior and a post-behavior of performable objects. This leads to a division of
                                                                                                                                                 processing and performing which also facilitates aspects of the software-
                                                                                                                                                 maintenance. Furthermore, the division of pre- and post-behaviors could be used to
                                                                                                                                                 realize dynamic investigations.
                                                                                                                                                     The results of this investigation are especially related to the PAS, presented in
                                                                                                                                                 previous work, e.g. [16, 18, 21]. However, the proposed way of how to incorporate
                                                                                                                                                 qualitative behavior in process simulations, could also be interesting for other types
                                                                                                                                                 of simulations. After the evaluation in this paper showed the proposed change to be
                                                                                                                                                 useful, the PAS has to be changed. After this change will be implemented, it could be
                                                                                                                                                 interesting to investigate its impact on the performance during the simulation.
                                                                                                                                                 Further research is necessary to evaluate the e®ectiveness of this proposal in other
                                                                                                                                                 software solutions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Extension of a Simulation Software   19


                                                                                                                                                 References
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                  1. T. K. Abdel-Hamid, The dynamics of software development project management: an
                                                                                                                                                     integrative system dynamics perspective, dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
                                                                                                                                                     nology (1984).
                                                                                                                                                  2. O. Armbrust, T. Berlage, T. Hanne, P. Lang, J. Münch, H. Neu, S. Nickel, I. Rus, A.
                                                                                                                                                     Sarishvili, S. van Stockum and A. Wirsen, Simulation-based software process modeling
                                                                                                                                                     and evaluation, in Handbook of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering: Re-
                                                                                                                                                     cent Advances, ed. S. K. Chang, Vol. 3 (World Scienti¯c Publishing Company, Singapore,
                                                                                                                                                     2005), pp. 333–364. DOI: 10.1142/9789812775245_0012.
                                                                                                                                                  3. T. K. Abdel-Hamid and S. E. Madnick, Software Project Dynamics: An Integrated Ap-
                                                                                                                                                     proach (Prentice-Hall, New York, 1991). Pearson Education. ISBN: 0-13-822040-9.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                  4. B. W. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cli®s, New
                                                                                                                                                     Jersey, 1981) ISBN 0-13-822122-7.
                                                                                                                                                  5. W. F. Clocksin and C. S. Mellish, Programming in Prolog, 5th edn. (Springer, New York,
                                                                                                                                                     2003). DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-55481-0.
                                                                                                                                                  6. N. T. Danh, Potential challenges for software engineering applications and practical
                                                                                                                                                     solutions, J. Positiv. School Psychol. 6(8) (2022) 1051–1056.
                                                                                                                                                  7. W. Dong, Using a system dynamics simulation model to explore the validity of dynamics
                                                                                                                                                     of Agile software development, Master thesis, Iowa State University, Iowa (2021). DOI:
                                                                                                                                                     10.31274/etd-20210609-47.
                                                                                                                                                  8. E. A. Elfaiz and T. Raharjo, The obstacles of software process improvement in software
                                                                                                                                                     house: A systematic literature review and empirical study, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 1811
                                                                                                                                                     (2021) 012102. IOP Publishing. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1811/1/012102.
                                                                                                                                                  9. B. B. N. França and G. H. Travassos, Are we prepared for simulation based studies in
                                                                                                                                                     software engineering yet? CLEI Electron. J. 16 (2013) 9. Centro Latinoamericano de
                                                                                                                                                     Estudios en Informatica, Available online on the website from SciELO Uruguay, Scien-
                                                                                                                                                     cti¯c Electronic Library Online at URL: www.scielo.edu.uy/scielo.php?pid=S0717-
                                                                                                                                                     50002013000100009&script=sci arttext, accessed 2017-OCTOBER-16. [Online-Version,
                                                                                                                                                     ISSN 0717-5000].
                                                                                                                                                 10. J. A. García-Garcíaa, J. G. Enríqueza, M. Ruiz, C. Arevalo and A. Jimenez-Ramírez,
                                                                                                                                                     Software process simulation modeling: Systematic literature review, Comput. Stand.
                                                                                                                                                     Interf. 70 (2020) 103425. Elsevier. DOI: 10.1016/j.csi.2020.103425.
                                                                                                                                                 11. J. Heimicke, K. Dühr, M. Krüger, G.-L. Ng and A. Albers, A framework for generating agile
                                                                                                                                                     methods for product development, in 31st CIRP Design Conference 2021 (CIRP Design
                                                                                                                                                     2021), ScienceDirect, Procedia CIRP 100, Elsevier Ltd., 2021. DOI: 10.1016/j.pro-
                                                                                                                                                     cir.2021.05.043.
                                                                                                                                                 12. R. Hevner, S. T. March and J. Park, Design science in information systems research, MIS
                                                                                                                                                     Quart. 28 (2004) 75–105. DOI: 10.2307/25148625.
                                                                                                                                                 13. M. Jørgensen, Team resource management decisions in software development projects, in
                                                                                                                                                     2021 IEEE 23rd Conference on Business Informatics (CBI), 2021. DOI: 10.1109/
                                                                                                                                                     CBI52690.2021.00011.
                                                                                                                                                 14. S. Kiebusch, B. Franczyk and A. Speck, An unadjusted size measurement of embedded
                                                                                                                                                     software system families and its validation, Soft. Process: Improv. Pract. 4(11) (2006)
                                                                                                                                                     435–446. Wiley Online Library.
                                                                                                                                                 15. M. T. Khatun, K. Hiekata, Y. Takahashi and I. Okada, Design and management of
                                                                                                                                                     software development projects under rework uncertainty: A study using system dy-
                                                                                                                                                     namics, J. Decis. Syst. (Informa UK Limited, Taylor & Francis Group, 2022). DOI:
                                                                                                                                                     10.1080/12460125.2021.2023257.
                                                                                                                                                 20   D. Kuhlen & A. Speck


                                                                                                                                                 16. D. Kuhlen and A. Speck, Business process analysis by model checking, in Proc. 5th Int.
                                                                                                                                                     Symp. Data-Driven Process Discovery and Analysis SIMPDA, eds. P. Ceravolo and S.
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                     Rinderle-Ma, 2015, pp. 154–170.
                                                                                                                                                 17. D. Kuhlen and A. Speck, Project-economy, in Meißner Hochschulschriften, ed. F. Lang,
                                                                                                                                                     6th edn. (Hochschule Meißen (FH) und Fortbildungszentrum, Der Rektor Freistaat
                                                                                                                                                     Sachsen, Germany, 2016). ISSN (Print) 2513-0579, ISSN (Online) 2513-0951.
                                                                                                                                                 18. D. Kuhlen and A. Speck, The way of designing a simulation software in order to evaluate
                                                                                                                                                     the economic performance in software development, in ICCMS '17 Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
                                                                                                                                                     Computer Modeling and Simulation, Int. Conf. Proc. Series by ACM, 2016. DOI 10.1145/
                                                                                                                                                     3036331.3036347.
                                                                                                                                                 19. D. Kuhlen and A. Speck, Economic output under the conditions of social freedom in
                                                                                                                                                     software development, Int. Softw. Eng. Appl. 7(6) (2016) 17–31. DOI: 10.5121/
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com




                                                                                                                                                     ijsea.2016.7602.
                                                                                                                                                 20. O. S. Kristiansen, U. Sandberg, C. Hansen, M. Skovgaard Jensen, J. Friederich and S.
                                                                                                                                                     Lazarova-Molnar, Experimental comparison of open source discrete-event simulation
                                                                                                                                                     frameworks, in Simulation Tools and Techniques, 13th EAI Int. Conf. SIMUtools 2021
                                                                                                                                                     Virtual Event, Proceedings, eds. D. Jiang and H. Song, Cham, Switzerland: Springer
                                                                                                                                                     Nature Switzerland AG, 2021, pp. 315–330.
                                                                                                                                                 21. D. Kuhlen, Kostensenkungspotenzialfunktion der Softwareproduktion, dissertation,
                                                                                                                                                     Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel (2019).
                                                                                                                                                 22. M. Kumar, O. S. Vaidya and R. K. Srivastava, Impact of task priority on software supply
                                                                                                                                                     chain: A simulation approach, South Asian J. Bus. Stud. 10(3) (2021) 326–341. Emerald
                                                                                                                                                     Publishing Limited. [DOI: 10.1108/SAJBS-03-2020-0069].
                                                                                                                                                 23. [Microsoft Visio Plan 2] Microsoft Corporation (year unknown): \Microsoftr Visior
                                                                                                                                                     Plan 2 MSO". Version 2202.
                                                                                                                                                 24. K. E. van Oorschot, K. Sengupta and L. N. van Wassenhove, Dynamics of agile software
                                                                                                                                                     development, in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. System Dynamics Society, Vol. 6, 2009, pp. 3910–
                                                                                                                                                     3939. ISBN: 978-1-61567-607-1.
                                                                                                                                                 25. K. Pe®ers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger and S. Chatterjee, A design science re-
                                                                                                                                                     search methodology for information systems research, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 24(3) (2008)
                                                                                                                                                     45–77. M. E. Sharpe, Inc. DOI: 10.2753/MIS0742-1222240302.
                                                                                                                                                 26. N. Rahman, A simulation model for application development in data warehouses, Int. J.
                                                                                                                                                     Oper. Res. Inf. Syst. 9(1) (2018) 66–80. IGI Global. DOI: 10.4018/IJORIS.2018010104.
                                                                                                                                                 27. L. M. Restrepo-Tamayo, G. P. Gasca-Hurtado, L. E. Machuca-Villegas and S. Morillo-
                                                                                                                                                     Puente, Productivity of Software Development Teams Based on Social and Human Fac-
                                                                                                                                                     tors: A Dynamic Conceptual Model. In Information Systems and Technologies, eds. A.
                                                                                                                                                     Rocha, H. Adeli, G. Dzemyda and F. Moreira, WorldCIST 2022. Lecture Notes in Networks
                                                                                                                                                     and Systems, Vol 470 (Springer, Cham, 2022), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04829-
                                                                                                                                                     6 2.
                                                                                                                                                 28. A. Radecki and T. Rybicki, Simulation oriented layer of embedded software architecture
                                                                                                                                                     for rapid development of custom embedded systems virtual simulators used in didactics,
                                                                                                                                                     Appl. Sci. 12 (2022) 6322. MDPI. DOI: 10.3390/app12136322.
                                                                                                                                                 29. A. Speck, E. Pulvermüller and D. Heuzeroth, Validation of business process models, in
                                                                                                                                                     Correctness of Modelbased Software Composition, Proceedings ECOOP 2003 Workshop
                                                                                                                                                     #11,17th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming, Technical Report No.
                                                                                                                                                     2003-13, Interner Bericht (Internal Report), eds. R. Van Der Straeten, A. Speck, E.
                                                                                                                                                     Pulvermüller, M. Clauß and A. Pleuss (2003). Universität Karlsruhe Fakultät für Infor-
                                                                                                                                                     matik. DOI: 10.5445/IR/3142003.
                                                                                                                                                 30. SWI Prolog \SWI-Prolog". Version 8.2.4. https://www.swi-prolog.org/download/stable,
                                                                                                                                                     accessed 2021-OCT-22 (2021).
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Extension of a Simulation Software   21


                                                                                                                                                 31. J. O. Wesch, An implementation strategy for Tecnomatix Plant Simulation software,
                                                                                                                                                     Master thesis, North-West University NWU(r) (2022). Available online on the website
by PONTIFICIA UNIVERSIDADE CATOLICA DO PARANA on 08/13/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.




                                                                                                                                                     from North-West University at URL: https://repository.nwu.ac.za/bitstream/handle/
                                                                                                                                                     10394/39342/Wesch%20JO%20¯nal%20copy.pdf?sequence=1, accessed 2022-AUG-22.
                                                                                                                                                 32. M. Wu and H. Yan, Simulation in software engineering with system dynamics: A case
                                                                                                                                                     study, J. Softw. 10(4) (2009) 1127–1135. Academy Publisher. DOI: 10.4304/
                                                                                                                                                     jsw.4.10.1127-1135.
                                                                                                                                                 33. Zhao, J. Cao, S. Jiang and Q. Qi, An agent based simulation system for open source
                                                                                                                                                     software development, in 2020 IEEE World Congress on Services, 2020, pp. 164–170.
                                                                                                                                                     DOI: 10.1109/SERVICES48979.2020.00044.
                         Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2023.33:1-21. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
