    Monitoring the Software Development Process
                with Process Mining

                          Saimir Bala and Jan Mendling

               Vienna University of Economics and Business, Austria
                         firstname.lastname@wu.ac.at



      Abstract. Software projects typically need to be monitored in detail
      regarding when what was done in order to demonstrate adherence to
      methodologies, rules, regulations, guidelines or best practices. To this end,
      it is of utmost importance to obtain factual knowledge from empirical
      evidence about the actual software development process. A major problem
      in this context is the lack of a centralized control of by a central system.
      Although it is hard to obtain full knowledge of the overall software
      development process, several cues can be gathered by analyzing pieces of
      information that are stored by supporting IT systems (e.g., issue trackers
      and version control). This position paper presents research in progress
      for extracting process knowledge from the historical data of software
      artifacts.This work extends the applicability of process mining techniques
      to software processes.
      Keywords: mining software development, process mining, mining sofr-
      ware repositories, project mining, artifacts evolution


1    Introduction
Monitoring the process of software development is highly important to project
managers who want to deliver good software in time and within budget. In practice,
various project management approaches exist that guide the managers during
the development of software projects. Usually these guidelines and methodologies
stem from experience. However, in practical scenarios, every software development
endeavor is different. Therefore, there is the need to extract the real software
process from the data. A starting point is the empirical evidence given from the
historical evolution of the artifact. This provides important cues for monitoring
the adherence of actual work to existing projects plans and milestones.
    Literature has addressed several aspects about getting process insights from
historical data. However, the problem has been tackled separately from different
disciplines. Contributions from the process mining discipline focus on obtaining
process models from well structured event logs [1]. Contributions from the
mining software repositories area focus on obtaining results from a software
engineering point of view, e.g., code quality, code complexity, user analysis,
functional dependencies, software visualization, etc [16]. Lastly, text mining has
no notion of process, but it is a fundamental field of study that helps dealing
with unstructured data, such as user comments in a software repository [3].
2        S. Bala, J. Mendling

    Process mining techniques fall short when it comes to mining the overarching
software process. Nevertheless, several pieces of traces of the software process
can be found in system logs. Therefore, our driving question can be stated as
follows. RQ: What can be discovered from software development data for obtaining
knowledge about the process?. To answer the question, we consider extending the
process mining discipline towards software development. As a result, this work
aims at assisting project managers in decision making. This is done by extracting
knowledge from data that is generated during the lifetime of software projects.
Unstructured data from the tools (e.g. user comments from Version Control
System (VCS) and Issue Tracking System (ITS)) are also taken into account.
The expected result is a body of techniques and tools that can be used to for
analyzing software data in a process mining fashion. In this way, we create bridge
between the research areas of process mining and mining software repositories.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the problem
and related literature, and draws the requirements for a solution. Section 3 pro-
vides the challenges and how they can be tackled. Section 4 draw the conclusions
and provides a plan to address these challenges.


2     Background

2.1    Problem Definition

Software development processes are characterized as follows. First, although there
is a planning phase, they are conducted creatively, i.e. there exists no strict process
model that is followed by the developers. Second, they follow guidelines and
methodologies on software development project, such Rational Unified Process
(RUP), Scrum1 , Waterfall, etc. These guidelines are recommendations that stem
from experience. However, none of them is extracted from empirical evidence.
Third, typically there is a plethora of tools used and process evidence is scattered
among different logs. Fourth, there is typically no central system to control the
overarching process execution. Fifth, it is highly relevant to track the process
because of project managers want to be able to efficiently detect performance
measures such as number of issues, bottlenecks, timeliness, handover of work,
productivity, etc.
    Software development processes fall into the category of project-oriented
business processes [6]. That is, ad-hoc plans performed with limited resources and
time, but with a clear goal: develop a software artifact. Unlike classic business
processes which are best captured with notations such as Petri nets and BPMN,
software development processes fall into the category of project-oriented business
processes, which are usually captured by models such as Gantt and PERT
diagrams.
    An example of software development is the following. A new version of a
software needs to be developed by company X. In general, company X knows how
to develop software. However, before running straightly into the development
1
    https://www.scrum.org
                                                                             Monitoring the Software Development Process                                 3

phase, the company first makes sure to gather and properly formulate all the
requirements. In a Scrum scenario these requirements would be written down
as user stories. At a later stage, the project manager needs to plan the time
and resources allocated to the respond to project deadlines. He can go through
the list of requirements that need to be implemented and assign to an effort
estimation value to each of them. With the plan done, the development phase
can commence. During the development phase, resources address the task in a
creative way, choosing the order of the tasks according to their own knowledge
and expertise, until eventually all the tasks are terminated.



                                                  Software Development
                                                         Process
             Process




                                                                         Requirements
                                                                           elicitation       Planning         Development




                                                      Project                                       Software
             Resources, Artifacts, Repositories




                                                    Management                                    Development




                                                            Issue Tracking      Management              Version Control
                                                                System             Team                     System      Development Team

                                                         Issues,                                                                   Versions Control,
                                                       Features,                                                                   Commits.
                                                           Bugs,      Project                                    Software
                                                                                                                                   Artifact evolution,
                                                          Users     Management                                Implementation
                                                                                                                                   Users
                                                                       Data                                        Data

                                                   Requirements,                                                               Log files
                                                    tasks, SLAs




                                                                         Fig. 1: Problem context

    Several tools are used by software project participants to support their work.
Therefore, traces about the overall process are typically scattered among different
repositories and different artifacts, e.g., spreadsheets, word processor documents,
programming languages files, emails, etc. This makes it difficult to obtain full
knowledge about the overall business process. Two major challenges are to
correlate heterogeneous events from different sources of evidence pertaining the
same process and to extract information from unstructured data such as user
comments when working on tasks. Thus, obtaining full process knowledge is a
complex task.
    Although the data is scattered and often unstructured, there are still repos-
itories that we can study in order to obtain process knowledge. An important
dimension of the software development process is the work perspective. It is
particularly interesting for project managers to know if planning phase was
realistic with respect to the development efforts. Two software tools that are
commonly used in software development are ITS (e.g., JIRA, GitHub Issues)
and VCS (e.g. Subversion, Git). The evolution of these two repositories can be
analyzed to extract relevant knowledge about the software development process.
Figure 1 illustrates the problem context.
4            S. Bala, J. Mendling

    Existing software repositories allow for many ways to access their log files.
However, the most relevant information that they provide are about actions
done by the user to change the repository state. In the more specific case, VCS
logs consist of an ordered set of commits bearing information about users, files,
timestamp, comments and type of change that were stored at particular moment
in time. ITS typically come with richer information, most importantly they
inform about users, task, type of task (e.g., bug, new feature, requirement,
etc), timestamps, related issues, etc. To extract knowledge about the software
development process, these properties of repositories must be taken into account.
Table 1 gives an overview of the main information that can be found in systems,
such a VCS.

                              Table 1: An excerpt of a VCS log data
Id    Resource   Date          Comment                      Diff
                                                            diff –git a/README.md b/README.md
                 2017-01-31
 1    John                     Create readme file           @@ -0,0 +1 @@
                 12:16:30
                                                            +# StoryMiningSoftwareRepositories
                                                            diff –git a/README b/README
                 2017-02-01                                 @@ -1,0 +2,3 @@
 2    Mary                     Add a license                +The MIT License (MIT)
                 10:13:51
                                                            +
                                                            +Copyright (c) 2015 Mary+
                                                            diff –git a/README.md b/README.md
                                                            @@ -1,4 +1,5 @@
                 2017-02-02                                 + # string 1, string 2, string 3
 3    Paul                     Updated the requirements.
                 16:10:22
                                                            diff –git a/requirements.txt b/requirements.txt
                                                            @@ -0,0 +1 @@
                                                            +The software must solve the problems
                                                            diff –git a/model.java b/model.java
                                                            @@ -1,9 +1,10 @@
                                                            +public static methodA(){int newVal=0;
                                                            @@ -21,10 +23,11 @@
                 2017-02-02                                 + ”1/0”,,”0/0”,
 4    Paul                     Implement new requirements
                 15:00:02
                                                            diff –git a/test.java b/test.java
                                                            @@ -0,0 +1,2 @@
                                                            +//test method A
                                                            +testMethodA()


    Because the project managers can benefit from a process view to better analyze
hidden aspects (such as the behavioral one) of the software development process,
we focus on adapting and transforming the data to fit process mining. Thus, we
can better define our problem based on the four aspects of process mining [1]:
i) time perspective; ii) control-flow perspective; iii) organizational perspective;
and iv) case perspective. In the following, we will define four requirements, each
addressing one process mining perspective.


2.2     Related Literature

This problem is related to three areas: i) Process Mining (PM); ii) Mining
Software Repositories (MSR); and iii) Text Mining (TM).
                               Monitoring the Software Development Process      5

    Process mining contributions have focused on transforming this problem into
a process mining problem. These approaches enrich VCS log data with case and
activity information and consequently use process mining to discover a model. In
this category, Kindler et al. [11,12] can discover a Petri net from a structured
and enriched version control log. This approach was further improved by Rubin
et al. [19] and a ProM2 was provided. Poncin et al. [17] provide the FRASR
framework for preprocessing software repositories such that they can be used in
ProM. While providing interesting insights, these contributions leave out many
important aspects of software development projects, such as for instance trying
to understand whether the process was done according to the plan.
    MSR focuses on software engineering aspects, like code quality metrics, mod-
ularization, code complexity, user networks, and other important metric. In
general, methods from MSR provide useful dependency analyses of the reposi-
tory structure. Contributions in this area focus on the users, the artifacts and
the repository evolution [23,9], and network analysis of file dependency graph
based on commit distance [2,22]. Also techniques for trend analysis [20] and
inter-dependencies between developers [14] are proposed. However, none of these
works aims at extracting knowledge about the business process.
    TM focuses on obtaining structured information from unstructured textual
data, and mainly uses Natural Language Processing (NLP). Works that use NLP
can be found in both PM and MSR. In the Business Process Management (BPM)
area, NLP techniques have been used to understand process activities [13,15]
and analyze software processes under a knowledge-intensive perspective [10,18].
Likewise, in the MSR area, NLP has been used as an information extraction tool
to obtain informative metrics from a software engineering perspective [21,8].
    This paper combines ideas from the above mentioned areas to devise algo-
rithms for mining the software development process by exploiting techniques
from MSR.


2.3    Research Question and Solution Requirements

In the light of the above considerations, we derive the following requirements for
extending process mining towards the analysis of software repositories.
    R1. Mining the time perspective. Given a software repository, extract
information about the temporal order of the activities. For example, the develop-
ment activity takes 2 weeks on average, the average time of task creation is 15
minutes, etc.
    R2. Mining the case perspective. Given a software repository, extract
information about the case perspective. For example, all the bugs are solved in a
3 steps iteration, or a quality piece of code takes a conversation with 3 people
and is successfully merged into the main branch after 1 week, etc.
    R3. Mining the organizational perspective. Given a software repository,
extract information about the organizational perspective. For example, the
2
    http://www.promtools.org
6      S. Bala, J. Mendling

software development is carried out by a team of 4 people, the actual user roles
of the company are developer and tester, etc.
    R4. Mining the control-flow perspective. Given a software repository,
extract information about the control-flow perspective. For example, the testing
is always done before development, or while new features are worked on, also
new requirements are created, etc.


3     Extracting Knowledge on Software Development

This section presents the approach for addressing the requirements. In the
following, we describe approaches and challenges to address the four requirements.


3.1   Mining the Time Perspective

Mining the time perspective from a software repository is defined as extracting
temporal process knowledge. This problem relates to monitoring whether the
process was executed respecting a predefined plan. Typically the process involves
various actors which track their work through the use of VCS. Often, the plans
are not represented in standard process notation. Rather, Gantt or PERT charts
are used.




Fig. 2: Mining the time perspective of software development into a Gantt chart

   Challenges are i) time approximation (i.e., when the activity really started,
compared to when it was registered in the log); ii) granularity (i.e., be able to
switch from a detailed view of the single events and a coarse-grained view of the
overall project); and iii) coverage (i.e., how much work effort was put within
the duration of the activity). Figure 2 depicts the idea of mining a Gantt chart
from VCS logs. The output is presented in a way that is informative to project
managers. Details about the technique can be found in [6].


3.2   Mining the Case Perspective

The identification of process cases is not an easy task when it comes to software
development data. However, a highly informative case candidate can be considered
the data artifact itself. According to [1], cases can also be characterized by the
values of data elements. In line with this, it is possible to devise techniques
                                        Monitoring the Software Development Process                            7

that study the artifact evolution. Although it can be input to process mining
techniques, this evolution can also be analyzed as a time series. An example of
such evolution is given in Figure 3, which shows the lines of code (LOC) changes
over time.




 Fig. 3: Evolution of files in a version control systems: LOC changes over time

   Challenges related to the artifact evolution pertain prediction of plateaus
and pattern recognition. The results reflect work patterns over the artifact. For
example, when a data file is not being modified anymore, its time series has a
plateau and it can be interpreted that the document is now ready for release.
A relevant problem in software development is bad modularization. Especially,
the dependency of two artifacts on one another is considered a bad practice.
Two time series can be compared together and file dependencies can be found
that reflect work coupling. This is equivalent to finding dependence between two
processes which might have been designed for different purposes.


            Update         Specify solve time    Add requirements             Modify             Update
        requirements.txt      for problem              file                requirements       requirements

          Modify                                              Add solver          Implement        Update
                           Fix bug         Create model
         method A                                              methods            method B        model.java



                       Fig. 4: Processes of two work-dependent files

    We have devised a proof-of-concept in [7]. Figure 4 shows a possible outcome
of the technique. The result is obtained by identifying couples of files with similar
evolution and mining a business process from the comments. As the result is
aggregated, several comments have been combined together an mined as a story.
Among other things, the technique allows to profile existing software development
projects.

3.3   Mining the Organizational Perspective
Software development projects are knowledge intensive, thus involve creativity
and flexibility. Project participants are free to tackle development tasks according
to their expertise and ideas to solve ad-hoc problems. De facto, members may
8       S. Bala, J. Mendling

behave according several roles in the organization. Therefore, the discovery of
the roles of a software project may give important insights on the actual project.
Role discovery can help in the monitoring existing projects in two ways. First,
emerging roles can be analyzed in order to have a better skills profiling of the
resources. Second, emerging roles can be used to check whether resources are
breaking contractual agreements or norms.
    We have developed an approach for tackling the problem of mining the orga-
nizational perspective in software development projects. The approach provides
information about the actors involved in the business process and their relations.
In substance, it provides automatic classification of resources into company roles
(e.g., developer, tester, etc) based on the comments of project participants. It
works on VCS logs and provides information about the people, their roles, other
systems involved, the organization hierarchy, the social network, and resource
profiling. Figure 5 shows an example of resource profiles automatically inferred
from VCS comments.


                                                build        backend
                        documentation
                           data                                                                                              web
              toolManagement
                                                                                   vcsManagement
                                            7.0%2.0%7.5%                                                                            16.4%
                                        1.5%
                                       2.0%                                                                 refactor
                                                                13.4%
                                                                                                             data              3.0%                       test
                                                                                                                             4.5%                 43.3%
         maintenance           23.9%                                                               vcsManagement             1.5%
                                                                      9.4%              test
                                                                                                                             7.5%
                                                                      1.2%                            development               1.5%
                                       2.0%                                           removal                                    3.0%
                                                             16.0%                                                                 1.5%
                                          4.6%                                                               addition
                                              4.9%4.5%                                                                                    17.9%
                                                                                                         documentation
                       design                                                                                      removal
                          addition                                           web
                                     refactor           development                                                            maintenance




          Fig. 5: Profiles of a developer and a tester, from left to right.

    Challenges of using NLP concern the jargon used by software developers.
They often use technical terms, very short phrases, or a number of codes and
hyperlinks. These makes NLP techniques score low results even on simple tasks
like sentence parsing, or name-entity recognition. Therefore, approaches should
take into account several factors when mining for the organizational perspective.
The result allows the manager to have measurable information about the resources.
For example, do two people work better together and how can we build the best
team? Details of the approach to extract resource profiles can be found in [4].


3.4   Mining the Control-Flow Perspective

Important knowledge of the control flow of a software development process can be
extracted from VCS and ITS. One important mechanism widely used in software
development for collaboration are pull requests. A pull request is issued every
time a developer wants to contribute to the main source with a new piece of
code. Pull requests trigger communication among different people and may help
shedding light into problems, learn new things and obtain new ideas on the
                               Monitoring the Software Development Process            9

existing software. It is interesting for project managers and developers to better
understand factors and behavior that makes a pull request successful.
    In ongoing work, we are investigating the relation of the pull request process
and surrounding factors such as the generation of new ideas or change of behavior.
We have obtained a data set of pull requests spanning over two years from an
real world repository. User conversations have been manually annotated with
codes that classify them into categories of comments. We are current able to
discriminate whether a comment is a new idea, an assumption, a merge that
closes a pull request, etc. Considering the pull request identifiers as cases and
the codes as activities, we are able extract the process of the pull requests. It is
interesting to compare how the conversation (i.e., behavioral perspective) unfolds
before and after a pull request is merged. We plan to explain these differences by
also taking into account further information from text such as emotions.
    The challenge of mining the control-flow usually pertains the completeness of
data and the case and activity identification. While PM contribution have been
focusing mostly on the control-flow perspective, techniques from MSR hardly go
beyond mining the bug lifecycle [5]. The nature of software development process
makes it difficult to recognize recurrent activities when only VCS are analyzed.


4   Expected Contribution and Implications for Research
This position paper presents research on mining the software development process.
Approaches towards discovering the perspectives of time, resources and cases
have been developed and the results suggest that obtaining process knowledge
from software repositories brings new insights for the project managers [4,6,7].
In future work, we plan to complete the research by tackling the problem of
discovering the flow-perspective of the software development process. Usefulness
will be evaluated through user studies.
    This research extends the process mining field towards its adoption on software
repositories. Project managers would benefit from this research by having a
process perspective on their ongoing projects through visual models and diagrams,
thus overcoming existing flat approaches based on simple indicators such as
burndown charts or change plots offered by existing tools.


References
 1. van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Process mining: data science in action. Springer (2016)
 2. Abate, P., Boender, J., Di Cosmo, R., Zacchiroli, S.: Strong dependencies between
    software components. 2009 3rd Int. Symp. Empir. Softw. Eng. Meas. ESEM 2009
    pp. 89–99 (2009)
 3. Aggarwal, C., Zhai, C.: Mining Text Data. Springer (2012)
 4. Agrawal, K., Aschauer, M., Thonhofer, T., Bala, S., Rogge-Solti, A., Tomsich, N.:
    Resource Classification from Version Control System Logs. In: EDOC Workshop.
    vol. September, pp. 249–258 (2016)
 5. Akbarinasaji, S., Caglayan, B., Bener, A.: Predicting bug-fixing time: A replication
    study using an open source software project. J. Syst. Softw. 136, 173–186 (2018)
10      S. Bala, J. Mendling

 6. Bala, S., Cabanillas, C., Mendling, J., Rogge-Solti, A., Polleres, A.: Mining Project-
    Oriented Business Processes. In: Motahari-Nezhad, H.R., Recker, J., Weidlich, M.
    (eds.) BPM 2015, Innsbruck, Austria. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9253,
    pp. 425–440. Springer (2015)
 7. Bala, S., Revoredo, K., de A.R. Gonçalves, J.C., Baião, F., Mendling, J., Santoro,
    F.: Uncovering the Hidden Co-evolution in the Work History of Software Projects.
    In: Carmona, J., Engels, G., Kumar, A. (eds.) BPM 2017, Barcelona, Spain. Lecture
    Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10445, pp. 164–180. Springer (2017)
 8. Chen, T.H., Thomas, S.W., Hassan, A.E.: A survey on the use of topic models
    when mining software repositories. Empir. Softw. Eng. 21(5), 1843–1919 (2016)
 9. D’Ambros, M., Lanza, M., Lungu, M.: Visualizing co-change information with the
    evolution radar. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 35(5), 720–735 (2009)
10. de A. R. Gonçalves, J.C., Santoro, F.M., Baião, F.A.: Let Me Tell You a Story -
    On How to Build Process Models. J. UCS 17(2), 276–295 (2011)
11. Kindler, E., Rubin, V., Schäfer, W.: Activity Mining for Discovering Software
    Process Models. Software Engineering 79, 175–180 (2006)
12. Kindler, E., Rubin, V., Schäfer, W.: Incremental Workflow Mining Based on
    Document Versioning Information. In: Li, M., Boehm, B., Osterweil, L. (eds.)
    Unifying the Software Process Spectrum, LNCS, vol. 3840, pp. 287–301. Springer
    Berlin Heidelberg (2006)
13. Leopold, H.: Natural Language in Business Process Models - Theoretical Foun-
    dations, Techniques, and Applications, Lecture Notes in Business Information
    Processing, vol. 168. Springer (2013)
14. Lindberg, A., Berente, N., Gaskin, J.E., Lyytinen, K.: Coordinating Interdepen-
    dencies in Online Communities: A Study of an Open Source Software Project. Inf.
    Syst. Res. 27(4), 751–772 (2016)
15. Mendling, J., Leopold, H., Pittke, F.: 25 challenges of semantic process modeling.
    Int. J. Inf. Syst. Softw. Eng. Big Co. 1(1), 78–94 (2014)
16. Pinzger, M., Kim, S.: Guest editorial: mining software repositories. Empir. Softw.
    Eng. 21(5), 2033–2034 (2016)
17. Poncin, W., Serebrenik, A., van den Brand, M.: Process mining software reposito-
    ries. In: Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR), 2011 15th European
    Conference on. pp. 5–14. IEEE (2011)
18. Richetti, P.H.P., de A. R. Gonçalves, J.C., Baião, F.A., Santoro, F.M.: Analysis
    of knowledge-intensive processes focused on the communication perspective. In:
    Carmona, J., Engels, G., Kumar, A. (eds.) BPM 2017, Barcelona, Spain, September
    10-15, 2017. LNCS, vol. 10445, pp. 269–285. Springer (2017)
19. Rubin, V., Günther, C.W., van Der Aalst, W.M., Kindler, E., Van Dongen, B.F.,
    Schäfer, W.: Process mining framework for software processes. In: Software Process
    Dynamics and Agility, pp. 169–181. Springer (2007)
20. Ruohonen, J., Hyrynsalmi, S., Leppänen, V.: Time series trends in software evolution.
    Journal of Software: Evolution and Process 27(12), 990–1015 (2015)
21. Thomas, S.W., Hassan, A.E., Blostein, D.: Mining unstructured software repositories.
    In: Evol. Softw. Syst., pp. 139–162. Springer (2014)
22. Weicheng, Y., Shen, B., Xu, B.: Mining GitHub: Why Commit Stops - Exploring
    the Relationship between Developer’s Commit Pattern and File Version Evolution.
    In: Muenchaisri, P., Rothermel, G. (eds.) APSEC 2013, Ratchathewi,Thailand,
    December 2-5, 2013 - Vol. 2. pp. 165–169. IEEE Computer Society (2013)
23. Zaidman, A., Rompaey, B.V., Demeyer, S., van Deursen, A.: Mining Software
    Repositories to Study Co-Evolution of Production & Test Code. In: ICST. pp.
    220–229. IEEE Computer Society (2008)
