   Experience in Discovering, Modeling, and Reenacting
      Open Source Software Development Processes
                           Chris Jensen1 and Walt Scacchi1
             1
              Institute for Software Research, University of California, Irvine
                                Irvine, CA USA 92697-3425
                       {cjensen, wscacchi}@ics.uci.edu


      Abstract. Process discovery has been shown to be a challenging problem
      offering limited results. This paper describes a new approach to process
      discovery that examines the Internet information spaces of open source
      software development projects. In particular, we examine challenges,
      strengths, weaknesses and findings when seeking to discover, model, and re-
      enact processes associated with large, global OSSD projects like
      NetBeans.org. The longer-term goal of this approach is to determine the
      requirements and design of more fully integrated process discovery and
      modeling mechanisms that can be applied to Web-based, open source
      software development projects.



1 Introduction
The goal of our work is to develop new techniques for discovering, modeling,
analyzing, and simulating software development processes based on information,
artifacts, events, and contexts that can be observed through public information
sources on the Web. Our problem domain examines processes in large, globally
dispersed open source software development (OSSD) projects, such as those
associated with the Apache Web server [16], Mozilla web browser [24], GNOME [9],
and integrated development environments like NetBeans [18] and Eclipse [4]. The
challenge we face is similar to what prospective developers or corporate sponsors
who want to join a given OSSD project face in trying to understand how software
development processes and activities are accomplished. As such, our efforts should
yield practical results.

   OSSD projects do not typically employ or provide explicit process models,
prescriptions, or schemes other than what may be implicit in the use of certain OSSD
tools for version control and source code compilation. In contrast, we seek to
demonstrate the feasibility of automating the discovery of software process
workflows via manual search and analysis methods in projects like NetBeans by
analyzing the content, structure, update and usage patterns of their Web information
spaces. These spaces include process enactment information such as informal task
prescriptions, community and information structure and work roles, project and
product development histories, electronic messages and communications patterns
among project participants ([5], [26], [29]). Likewise, corresponding events that
denote updates to these sources and other project repositories are also publicly
accessible. Though such ethnographic discovery approaches net a wealth of
information with which to model, simulate, and analyze OSSD processes, they are
limited by a lack of scalability when applied to the study of multiple OSSD
development projects (cf. [13]). Subsequently, it suggests the need for a more
automated approach to that can facilitate process discovery.

    In our approach, we identify the kinds of OSSD artifacts (e.g. source code files,
messages posted on public discussion forums, Web pages, etc.), artifact update events
(e.g. version release announcements, Web page updates, message postings, etc.), and
work contexts (e.g. roadmap for upcoming software releases, Web site architecture,
communications systems used for email, forums, instant messaging, etc.) that can be
detected, observed, or extracted across the Web. Though such an approach clearly
cannot observe the entire range of software development processes underway in an
OSSD project (nor do we seek to observe or collect data on private communications),
it does draw attention to what can be publicly observed, modeled, or re-enacted at a
distance. That is the focus of our effort.

    Our approach relies on use of a process meta-model to provide a reference
framework that associates these data with software processes and process models
[15]. As such, we have been investigating what kinds of processing capabilities and
tools can be applied to support the automated discovery and modeling of selected
software processes (e.g., for daily software build and periodic release) that are
common among many OSSD projects. The capabilities and tools include those for
Internet-based event notification, Web-based text data mining and knowledge
discovery, and previous results from process discovery studies. However, in this
study, we focus on identifying the foundations for discovering, modeling, and re-
enacting OSSD processes that can be found in a large, global OSSD project using a
variety of techniques and tools.

2 Related Work
Event notification systems have been used in many contexts, including process
discovery and analysis ([3], [30]). However, of the systems promising automated
event notification, many require process performers to obtain, install, and use event
monitoring applications on their own machines to detect when events occur. While
yielding mildly fruitful results, this approach is undesirable for several reasons. This
includes the need to install and integrate remote data collection mechanisms with
local or project-specific software development tools, and it is unclear who would take
on such effort within an existing OSSD project.

   Prior work in process event notification has also been focused on information
collected from command shell histories, applying inference techniques to construct
process model fragments from event patterns (object and tool invocations) [8]. They
advise that rather than seeking to discover the entire development process from
enactment instances, to instead focus on creating partial process specifications that
may overlap with one another. This also reflects variability in software process
enactment instantiation across iterations. This imparts additional inconvenience on
project developers, and relies on her/his willingness to use the particular tools that
monitor and analyze command shell events (which can become intractable when a
developer uses tools or repository services from remote networked systems). By
doing so, the number of process performers for whom data is collected may be
reduced well below the number of participants in the project due to privacy concerns
and the hassles of becoming involved. While closed source software engineering
organizations may mediate this challenge by leveraging company policies, OSSD
projects lack the ability to enforce adoption of such event-capture technology.

   Cook and Wolf [3] utilize algorithmic and statistical inference techniques to
model processes where the goal was to create a single, monolithic finite state machine
(FSM) representation of the process. However, it is not entirely clear that a single
FSM is appropriate for modeling complex processes. Similarly, other FSM-related
process representation schemes such as Petri-Net based FUNSOFT [6] offered a wide
variety of activity and state-chart diagrams. It appears however that these
representations may lack scalability when applied to a process situated within a global
organizational context involving multiple tools, diverse artifact types, and multiple
development roles across multiple networked sites of reasonable complexity, which is
typical of large OSSD projects (cf. [9]).

   Last, while process research has yielded many alternative views of software
process models, none has proven decisive or clearly superior. Nonetheless,
contemporary research in software process technology, such as Lil Jil [2], [21] and
PML [19] argues for analytical, visual, navigational and enactable representations of
software processes. Subsequently, we find it fruitful to convey our findings about
software processes, and the contexts in which they occur, using a mix of both
informal and formal representations of these kinds [28]. We employ this practice
here.

3 Problem Domain
We are interested in discovering, modeling, simulating, and re-enacting software
development processes in large, Web-based OSSD projects. Such projects are often
globally distributed efforts sometimes involving tens, hundreds, or thousands of
developers collaborating on products constituting thousands to millions of source
lines of code without meeting face-to-face, and often without performing modern
methods for software engineering ([26], [27]). Past approaches have shown process
discovery to be difficult, yielding limited results. However, the discovery methods we
use are not random probes in the dark, nor do they simply apply prior approaches.
Instead, we capitalize on contextual aids offered by the domain. Some of these
include:
• Web pages, including project status reports and task assignments, may be viewed
    and classified (informally) as object types.
• Asynchronous communications among project participants posted in threaded
    email discussion lists, which address process activities indicated by process
    identifier keywords (e.g., design, release, testing, etc.)
• Transcripts of synchronous communication via Internet chat (cf. [5]).
• Software problem/bug and issue reports, which reveal information on software
  bug reporting and maintenance/repair processes
• Testing scripts and results, which highlight project-based software testing
  practices
• Community newsletters, which highlight project milestone events (e.g., system
  releases, turnover of core developers in the projects)
• Web accessible software product source code directories and repositories, which
  carry timestamps and other identifiers indicating when source code objects were
  checked in/out, and versioning information.
• Software system builds (executable binaries) and distribution packages, which are
  constructed and released on a periodic basis (daily, candidate (alpha, beta), and
  final release (distribution version)
• OSS development tools in use in an OSSD project (e.g., concurrent version
  system (CVS), GNU compiler collection (gcc), bug reporting (bugzilla) (cf. [10])

• OSS development resources, including other software development artifacts and
  process fragment descriptions (e.g., How-To guides, lists of frequently asked
  questions (FAQs), etc.) [26]

    Each OSSD project has locally established methods of interaction,
communication, leadership, and control [14], whether explicit or implicit ([26], [27]).
These collaboration modes yield a high amount of empirically observable process
evidence, as well as a large degree of unrelated data. However, information spaces
are also dynamic. New artifacts are added, while existing ones are updated, removed,
renamed and relocated, else left to become outdated. Artifact or object contents
change, and project Web sites get restructured. In order to capture the history of
process evolution, these changes need to be made persistent and shared with new
OSSD project members. While code repositories and project email discussion
archives have achieved widespread use, it is less common for other artifacts, such as
instant messaging and chat transcripts, to be archived in a publicly available venue.
Nonetheless, when discovering a process in progress, changes can de detected
through comparison of artifacts at different time slices during the development
lifecycle. At times, the detail of the changes is beneficial, and at other times, simply
knowing what has changed and when is all that is important to determining the order
(or control flow sequence) of process events or activity. To be successful, tools for
automated process discovery must be able to efficiently access, collect, and analyze
the data including areas of the project Web space such as public email/mailing list
message boards, Web page updates, notifications of software builds/releases, and
software bug archives in terms of changes to the OSS information space [26], [27].

   To prove the viability of our process discovery approach, we demonstrate it with a
case study. For this task, we examine a selected process in the NetBeans project,
which is developing an open source IDE using Java technology1. The “requirements

1
 The NetBeans project was started in 1996, and SUN Microsystems began project
sponsorship in 1998. At present, more than 60 companies are participating in the
and release” process was chosen for study because its activities have short duration,
are frequently enacted, and have a propensity for available evidence that could be
extracted using automated technologies. The process was discovered, modeled
informally and formally, then prototyped for analysis and reenactment. The full
results of our initial case study may be found elsewhere [22]. The discussion of our
process discovery and modeling methods and results follows next.

4 Process Discovery and Modeling
Discovery of open source software processes relies on several data models. Firstly,
we need to determine what aspects of the process we wish to discover, defined by our
process meta-model. This meta-model is neither specific to our domain (OSSD
processes), nor software processes. To capture OSSD software processes, we need a
means of setting the problem domain within the terms of the meta-model. Such is the
task of the reference model. Once this is done, we may begin looking for instances of
processes within a corpus, in this case the OSSD project Web repository.

    The meta-model we use is that of Mi and Scacchi [15]. It provides us with a
vocabulary to describe the processes we examine. Our meta-model defines processes
hierarchically: processes are composed of tasks (sets of related actions) and atomic
actions. The hierarchy may be further divided (e.g. sub-processes, subtasks, and so
forth) to achieve an arbitrary degree of decomposition. Each activity is defined in
terms of process entities: agents that participate in the process activity, tools used by
those agents in the performance of the activity, and resources that are the product of
and are consumed by performance of the activity (see Figure 1). We find these to be
a minimal set of entities necessary to describe a process. This meta-model is
augmented with control-flow grammar in the process markup language (PML) [19]
we use to formally represent software processes to show the order in which activities
and instantiated.

   Unlike Cook and Wolf’s approach, we apply a priori knowledge of software
development for discovering processes. Accordingly, we use a reference model [11]
to help identify possible indicators (e.g., developer roles, probable tool types, input
and output objects) that a given activity has occurred. We do this by creating a
taxonomy of the process entities within the problem domain. Thus, we enumerate the
types of tools (and resources, activities, and agents-roles) we expect to find




project through their developers. In 2004, the project passed the threshold of more
than 100K developers contributing to the project.
Figure 1. Software process meta-model (cf. [15]).
referenced in the project corpus (e.g. “email client”) as well as instances of those
tools (e.g. “Mozilla Thunderbird”). This framework provides a mapping between the
tool, resource, activity, and role names discovered in the community Web with a
classification scheme of known tools, resources, activities, and roles used in open
source communities. The instances are necessary for discovering process entities
used within the corpus while types and genericity/hierarchy aid us in abstracting the
instance data into a more general process model spanning multiple enactments.

    Although we would like to achieve some degree of automation in discovering
open source software development processes, it is unreasonable to assume that a
complete solution is possible due to the heterogeneity of data available within and
across project information corpora. Instead, we seek to automate as much as possible
in order to ease the effort inherent to the task. To this end, our methodology
incorporates general information gathering independent of document type, augmented
by some analysis techniques specific to the type and structure of the data available.
Thus we automate the tasks that are easy to automate and provide value to make the
effort worthwhile. And, we do manually tasks for which automation is either too
difficult or does not provide payoff to validate effort required.

    We use indexing at the core to do much of the legwork of general information
gathering. We use this index to identify actions, tools, resources, and agents within
artifacts in the corpus. These are correlated across artifacts according to usage and
update information available. While we are able to tune the reference model to
contain instance values of actions, resources, and tools (e.g. “submit defect report”,
“x-test-results”, and “Issuezilla,” respectively), identifying process agents by proper
names a priori is not possible. Such identification requires document specific
analysis techniques. These include parsers for extracting names, user handles, and
email addresses from threaded mailing lists, chat logs, defect reports, and versioning
repositories. Once extracted, they are looked up in the index and added to the action-
tool-resource tuples already identified. Such document specific analysis may also be
used to uncover heretofore-unknown instances of other process entities (i.e. actions,
resources, and tools) in similar fashion and is essential to obtaining accurate
timestamps in documents that aggregate multiple software artifacts (e.g. threaded
mailing lists containing multiple messages within a single system file).

    Document specific analysis provides rich results with a cost. There are many
types of data and standards for document structure even for a single type of data and
these vary highly across OSSD projects. As a result, a broad array of tools
specifically tuned for each project corpus is required to obtain rich results. Such an
array is painstaking to develop, although available off-the-shelf partial solutions ease
this burden. Further, integrating large result sets from multiple data sources into a
single process model of any degree of formality is a complex task in itself. Our
reference model can suggest process entity tuples that are related and the temporal
information we are able to extract provides a timeline of activities. However learning
activity control flow and asserting an activity hierarchy remain somewhat an art as
opposed to a science.

    The discovery of processes within a specific OSSD project begins with a cursory
examination of the project Web space in order to ascertain what types of information
are available and where that information might be located within the project’s Web
site. Structure and content of the project Web space give us an idea of what
happened in terms of process actions, agents, tools, and resources, whereas artifact
usage and update patterns tell us when process activities happened as noted above.

   To situate the process within its organizational context, we look for modes of
contribution within the development process. The modes of contribution
(development roles) can be used to construct an initial set of activity scenarios, which
can be described as use cases for project or process participation.

    Though best known as a tenet of UML, use cases can serve as a notation to model
scenarios of activities performed by actors in some role that use one or more tools to
manipulate artifacts associated with an enterprise process or activity within it ([7],
[29]). The site map also shows a page dedicated to project governance hyperlinked
three layers deep within the site. This page exposes the primary member types, their
roles and responsibilities, which suggest additional use cases. Unlike those found
through the modes of contribution, the project roles span the breadth of the process,
though at a higher level of abstraction. Each use case can encode a process fragment.
In collecting use cases, we can extract out concrete actions that can then be assembled
into a process description to be modeled, simulated, and enacted.

   When aggregated, these use cases can be coalesced into an informal model of a
process and its context rendered as a rich hypermedia, an interactive semi-structured
Figure 2. A hyperlinked rich hypermedia of the NetBeans requirements and release process
[22]

                                                                 Test Builds
                                                     • The QA team tests the latest nightly
                                                        builds every Friday
                                                       • QA team executes a set of manual
                                                         tests on the builds as well as some
                                                         sanity checks
                                                     • Test results are categorized as
                                                       – Bug Types
                                                     • User Constraint:
                                                       – The tests depend on the manual
                                                         tests specification
                                                     • System Constraint:
                                                       – Not all bugs may be identified


Figure 3. A hyperlink selection within a rich hypermedia presentation that reveals a
corresponding use case
extension of Monk and Howard’s [17] rich picture modeling construct. The rich
hypermedia shown in Figure 2 identifies developer roles, tools, concerns, and
artifacts of development and their interaction, which are hyperlinked (indicated as
underlined phrases) to corresponding use cases and object/role descriptions (see
Figure 3). Such an informal computational model can be useful for newcomers to the
community looking to become involved in development and offers an overview of the
process and its context in the project, while abstracting away the detail of its
activities. The use cases also help identify the requirements for enacting or re-
enacting the process as a basis for validating, adapting, or improving the process.

    A critical challenge in reconstructing process fragments from a process enactment
instance is in knowing whether or not the evidence at hand is related, unrelated, or
anomalous.      Reliability of associations constructed in this fashion may be
strengthened by the frequency of association and the relevance of artifacts carrying
the association. If text extraction tools are used to discover elements of process
fragments, they must also note the context in which are located in to determine this
relevance. One way to do this is using the physical structure of the project’s Web site
(i.e. directory structure), as well as its logical structure (referencing/referenced
artifacts). In the NetBeans quality-assurance (Q-Build) testing example, we can
relate the “defects by priority” graph on the defect summary page2 to the defect
priority results from the Q-Build verification. Likewise, the defect tallies and
locations correlate to the error summaries in the automated testing (XTest) results3.
By looking at the filename and creation dates of the defect graphs, we know which
sets of results are charted and how often they are generated. This in turn identifies
the length of the defect chart generation process, and how often it is executed. The
granularity of process discovered can be tuned by adjusting the search depth and the
degree of inference to apply to the data gathered. An informal visual representation of
artifacts flowing through the requirements and release process appears in Figure 4.

   These process fragments can now be assembled into a formal process modeling
language description of the selected processes. Using the PML grammar and process
meta-model, we created an ontology for process description with the Protégé-2000
modeling tool [20]. The PML model builds from the use cases depicted in the rich
hypermedia, then distills them a set of actions or sub-processes that comprise the
process with its corresponding actor roles, tools, and resources and the flow sequence
in which they occur. A sample PML description that results appears in Figure 5.

5    Process Reenactment for Deployment, Validation, and
Improvement
Since their success relies heavily on broad, open-ended participation, OSSD projects
often have informal descriptions of ways members can participate, as well as offer
prescriptions for community building [26]. Although automatically recognizing and
modeling process enactment guidelines or policies from such prescriptions may seem
a holy grail of sorts for process discovery, there is no assurance that they accurately
reflect the process as it is enacted. However, taken with the discovered process, such



2
    http://qa.netbeans.org/bugzilla/graphs/summary.html as of March 2004
3
    http://www.netbeans.org/download/xtest-results/index.html as of March 2004
Figure 4. NetBeans Requirements and Release process flow graph [22]


sequence Test {
  action Execute automatic test scripts {
  requires { Test scripts, release binaries }
  provides { Test results }
  tool { Automated test suite (xtest, others) }
  agent { Sun Java Studio QA team }
  script { /* Executed off-site */ } }
action Execute manual test scripts {
  requires { Release binaries }
  provides { Test results }
  tool { NetBeans IDE }
  agent {users, developers, Sun Java Studio developers, QA team}
  script { /* Executed off-site */ } }
iteration Update Issuezilla {
  action Report issues to Issuezilla {
    requires { Test results }
    provides { Issuezilla entry }
    tool { Web browser }
    agent{users, developers, Sun Java Studio developers, QA
team}
    script {
      <br><a href="http://www.netbeans.org/issues/">Navigate to
Issuezilla </a>
      <br><a href=http://www.netbeans.org/issues/query.cgi>
Query Issuezilla </a>
      <br><ahref=http://www.netbeans.org/issues/enter_bug.cgi>
Enter issue </a> } }
Figure 5. A partial PML description of the testing sequence of the NetBeans release process
prescriptions begin to make it is possible to perform basic process validation and
conformance analysis by reconciling developer roles, affected artifacts, and tools
being used in modeled processes or process fragments (cf. [1], [23]).

   As OSSD projects are open to contributions from afar, it also becomes possible to
contribute explicit models of discovered processes back to the project under study so
that project participants can openly review, independently validate, refine, adapt or
otherwise improve their own software processes. Accordingly, we have contributed
our process models and analyses of the NetBeans requirements and release process in
the form of a public report hosted (and advertised) on the NetBeans.org Web site4.

   Process re-enactment allows us to recreate, simulate, or prototype process
enactments by navigationally traversing a semantic hypertext (i.e., PML)
representation of the process [19], [25]. These re-enactment prototypes are
automatically derived from a compilation of their corresponding PML process model,
and the instantiation of the complied result in a Web-based run-time (enactment)
environment [19]. One step in the process modeled for NetBeans appears in Figure 6,
drawn from the excerpt shown in Figure 5. In exercising repeated simulated process
enactment walkthroughs, we have been able to detect process fragments that may be
unduly lengthy, which may serve as good candidates for downstream process
engineering activities such as streamlining and process redesign [25]. Process re-
enactment also allows us, as well as participants in the global NetBeans project, to
better see the effects of duplicated work. As an example, we have four agent types
that test code. Users may carry out beta testing from a black box perspective,
whereas developers, contributors, and SUN Microsystems QA experts may perform
more in-depth white-box testing and analysis, and, in the case of developers and
contributors, not merely submit a report to the IssueZilla issue tracking system,5 but
may also take responsibility for resolving it.

   We are also able to detect where cycles or particular activities may be problematic
for participants, and thus where process redesign may be of practical value [25].
Process re-enactment prototypes are a useful means to interactively analyze whether
or how altering a process may lead to potential pitfalls that can be discovered before
they lead to project failure. Over the course of constructing and executing the
prototype we discovered some of the more concrete reasons that there are few
volunteers for the release manager position. The role has an exceptional amount of
tedious administrative tasks that are critical to the success of the project.

    Between scheduling the release, coordinating module stabilization, and carrying
out the build process, the release manager has a hand in almost every part of the
requirements and release process. This is a good indication that downstream activities
may also uncover a way to better distribute the tasks and lighten her/his load. The
self-selective nature of OSSD project participation has many impacts on

4
    See http://www.netbeans.org/community/articles/index.html, as of May 2003.
5
    See http://www.netbeans.org/kb/articles/issuezilla.html, as of March 2004.
Figure 6. An action step in a re-enactment of the NetBeans requirements and release process,
specified in Figure 5

their development process. If any member wishes not to follow a given process, the
process enforcement is contingent on the tolerance of her/his peers in the matter,
which is rarely the case in corporate development processes. If the project proves
intolerant of the alternative process, developers are free to simply not participate in
the project's development efforts and perform an independent software release build.

6 Conclusion
Our goal is to obtain process execution data and event streams by monitoring the
Web information spaces of open source software development projects. By
examining changes to the information space and artifacts within it, we can observe,
derive, or otherwise discover process activities. In turn, we reconstitute process
instances using PML, which provides us with a formal description of an enactable,
low-fidelity model of the process in question that can be analyzed, simulated,
redesigned, and refined for reuse and redistribution. But this progress still begs the
question of how to more fully automate the discovery and modeling of processes
found in large, global scale OSSD projects.

   Our experience with process discovery in the NetBeans project, and its
requirements and release process, and our case studies discovering, modeling, and
reenacting processes used in the Mozilla and Apache HTTPD projects suggest that a
bottom-up strategy for process discovery, together with a top-down process meta-
model, can serve as a suitable framework for process discovery, modeling and re-
enactment. As demonstrated in the testing example, action sequences are constructed
much like a jigsaw puzzle. We compile pieces of evidence to find ways to fit them
together in order to make claims about process enactment events, artifacts, or
circumstances that may not be obvious from the individual pieces. We find that these
pieces may be unearthed in ways that can be executed by software tools that are
guided by human assistance [12].

    Our approach to discovery, modeling, and reenactment relies on both informal and
formal process representations. We constructed use cases, rich pictures, flow graphs
as informal but semi-structured process representations which we transformed into a
formal process representation language guided by a process meta-model and support
tools. These informal representations together with a process meta-model then
provide a scheme for constructing formal process descriptions. Thus demonstration of
a more automated process discovery, modeling, and re-enactment environment that
integrates these capabilities and mechanisms is the next step in this research.
Additionally, we have applied this strategy towards socio-technical OSSD process as
well as processes spanning OSSD organizations and seek new process to discover,
model, and reenact.

   Finally, it is important to recognize that large OSSD projects are diverse in the
form and practice of their software development processes. Our long-term goal in this
research is to determine how to best support a more fully automated approach to
process discovery, modeling and re-enactment. Our study provides a case study of a
real-world process in a complex global OSSD project to demonstrate the feasibility of
such an approach. Subsequently, questions remain as to which OSSD processes are
most amenable to such an approach, which are likely to be of high value to the host
project or other similar projects, and whether all or some OSSD projects are
more/less amenable to such discovery and modeling given the richness/paucity of
their project information space and diversity of artifacts. As government agencies,
academic institutions and industrial firms all begin to consider or invest resources into
the development of large OSS systems, then they will seek to find what the best
OSSD processes are, or what OSSD practices to follow. Thus discovery and explicit
modeling of OSSD processes in forms that can be shared, reviewed, modified, re-
enacted, and redistributed appears to be an important topic for further investigation,
and this study represents a step in this direction.

7 Acknowledgements
The research described in this report is supported by grants from the National Science
Foundation #0083075, #0205679, #0205724, and #0350754. No endorsement
implied. Mark Ackerman at the University of Michigan Ann Arbor; Les Gasser at the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; John Noll at Santa Clara University; and
Margaret Elliott at the UCI Institute for Software Research are collaborators on the
research described in this paper.
References
1. Atkinson, D.C. and Noll, J. 2003.. Automated Validation and Verification of Process
Models, Proc. 7th Intern. IASTED Conf. Software Engineering and Applications, November.

2. Cass, A.G., Lerner, B., McCall, E., Osterweil, L. and Wise, A. 2000. Little JIL/Juliette: A
process definition language and interpreter. Proc. 22nd Intern. Conf. Software Engineering,
754-757, Limerick, Ireland, June.

3. Cook, J. and Wolf, A.L. 1998. Discovering Models of Software Processes from Event-Based
Data, ACM Trans. Software Engineering and Methodology, 7(3), 215-249.

4. Eclipse Web Site, 2005. http://www.eclipse.org

5. Elliott, M. and Scacchi, W., Free Software Development: Cooperation and Conflict in A
Virtual Organizational Culture, in S. Koch (ed.), Free/Open Source Software Development,
Idea Publishing, Hershey, PA, 2004.

6. Emmerich, W. and Gruhn, V., FUNSOFT Nets: a Petri-Net based Software Process
Modeling Language, Proc. 6th ACM/IEEE Int. Workshop on Software Specification and
Design, Como, Italy, IEEE Computer Society Press, 175-184, 1991.

7. Fowler, M. and Scott, K. 2000. UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Standard Object
Modeling Language. Second Ed. Addison Wesley:

8. Garg, P.K. and Bhansali, S. 1992. Process programming by hindsight. Proc. 14th Intern.
Conf. Software Engineering, 280-293.

9. German, D., 2003. The GNOME project: A case study of open source, global software
development, Software Process—Improvement and Practice, 8(4), 201-215.

10. Halloran, T., and Scherlis, W. 2002. High Quality and Open Source Software Practices,
Proc. 2nd Workshop on Open Source Software Engineering, Orlando, FL, May.

11. Jensen, C. and Scacchi, W. 2003.Applying a Reference Framework to Open Source
Software Process Discovery, in Proc. 1st Workshop on Open Source in an Industrial Context,
OOPSLA-OSIC03, Anaheim, CA October..

12. Jensen, C. and Scacchi, W. 2004. Data Mining for Software Process Discovery in Open
Source Software Development Communities, submitted for publication.

13. Jensen, C. and Scacchi, W. 2005, Process Modeling across the Web Information
Infrastructure, Software Process—Improvement and Practice, (to appear).

14. Jensen, C. and Scacchi, W. 2005b, Collaboration, Leadership, Control, and Conflict
Negotiation in the NetBeans.org Open Source Software Development Community, Proc. 38th
Hawaii Intern. Conf. Systems Sciences, Kona, HI.

15. Mi, P. and Scacchi, W. 1996. A Meta-Model for Formulating Knowledge-Based Models of
Software Development, Decision Support Systems, 17(4), 313-330.

16. Mockus, A., Fielding, R., and Herbsleb, J., 2002.Two Case Studies in Open Source
Software Development: Apache and Mozilla, ACM Trans. Software Engineering and
Methodology, 11(3), 309-346.
17. Monk, A. and Howard, S. 1998. The Rich Picture: A Tool for Reasoning about Work
Context. Interactions, 21-30, March-April.

18. NetBeans Web Site, 2005. http://www.netbeans.org

19. Noll, J. and Scacchi, W. 2001. Specifying Process Oriented Hypertext for Organizational
Computing. J. Network and Computer Applications 24 39-61.

20. Noy, N.F., Sintek, M., Decker, S., Crubézy, M., Fergerson, R.W. and Musen, M.A. 2001.
Creating Semantic Web Contents with Protégé-2000. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 16(2), 60-71.

21. Osterweil, L. 2003. Modeling Processes to Effectively Reason about their Properties, Proc.
ProSim’03 Workshop, Portland, OR, May 2003.

22. Oza, M., Nistor, E., Hu, S. Jensen, C., and Scacchi, W. 2002. A First Look at the Netbeans
Requirements and Release Process, http://www.ics.uci.edu/cjensen/papers/FirstLookNetBeans/

23. Podorozhny, R.M., Perry, D.E., and Osterweil, L. 2003, Artifact-based Functional
Comparison of Software Processes, Proc. ProSim’03 Workshop, Portland, OR, May 2003.

24. Reis C.R. and Fortes, R.P.M. 2002. An Overview of the Software Engineering Process and
Tools in the Mozilla Project, Proc. Workshop on Open Source Software Development,
Newcastle, UK, February

25. Scacchi, W., 2000. Understanding Software Process Redesign using Modeling, Analysis,
and Simulation, Software Process—Improvement and Practice, 5(2/3), 183-195.

26. Scacchi, W., 2002. Understanding the Requirements for Developing Open Source Software
Systems, IEE Proceedings—Software, 149(1), 25-39.

27. Scacchi, W., 2004, Free/Open Source Software Development Practices in the Game
Community, IEEE Software, 21(1), 59-67, Jan-Feb. 2004.

28. Scacchi, W., Jensen, C., Noll, J. and Elliott, M., 2005, Multi-Modal Modeling, Analysis,
and Validation of Open Source Software Development Processes, Proc. 1st Open Source
Software Conference, Genova, IT (to appear).

29. Viller, S., and Sommerville, I., 2000. Ethnographically Informed Analysis for Software
Engineers, Intern. J. Human-Computer Interaction, 53, 169-196.

30. Wolf, A.L. and Rosenblum, D.S. 1993. A Study in Software Process Data Capture and
Analysis. Proc. Second Intern. Conf. on the Software Process, 115-124.
